---
title: "Diagnosis: the art of being a doctor"
chapter: 1
authors: 
  - "David Randall"
  - "Adam Feather"
  - "Mona Waterhouse"
page_range: "1–12"
subjects: 
  - "Clinical Medicine"
  - "Diagnostic Reasoning"
  - "Doctor-Patient Communication"
keywords: 
  - "Medical consultation"
  - "History taking"
  - "Physical examination"
  - "Clinical reasoning"
  - "Diagnostic error"
  - "Patient safety"
  - "Artificial Intelligence (AI)"
summary: "An introduction to the principles of medical diagnosis, covering the consultation process, information gathering, diagnostic reasoning models, communication skills, and the evolving role of technology in medicine."
---

1
 DIAGNOSIS IN THE CLINICAL 
CONSULTATION
In many patient interactions, the forming of a diagnosis stands as 
a turning point in the therapeutic journey: the focus shifts from the 
gathering of information and the performance of tests to planning 
of treatment and discussion of outcomes.
Forming a diagnosis is 
a complex process, which always starts with taking a history.
The 
initial patient story is first developed into a set of problems, which in 
turn becomes a list of differential diagnoses.
Data- gathering, further 
information, initial treatment and the passage of time help to form 
and confirm a definitive diagnosis.
Fig. 1.1 shows how diagnosis is often an iterative process, in 
which information is gathered, interpreted and integrated to form a 
working diagnosis, and then communicated and acted on through 
treatment;
all the time the working diagnosis is refined or revised 
using newly gathered information, including the patient’s response 
to treatment.
THE MEDICAL CONSULTATION
The initial interaction – forming a rapport
First impressions matter.
A clinical interaction that begins badly 
often runs into problems later on.
Patients need to be able to share 
their most intimate and worrying problems and this will be impos -
sible if they cannot develop confidence and trust in their clinicians.
The clinician should always ask, ‘How would I wish my own doctor 
to behave?’ The physical environment can also be improved to help 
the interaction go well: always ensure patients’ privacy, dignity and 
comfort, treating them and their carers with respect.
A warm greeting is always worthwhile. Introduce yourself (and 
any other health professionals present), explaining your role and the 
purpose of the encounter.
A healthcare system is generally busy 
and confusing, so help patients understand where they are in their 
journey through it.
The ‘Hello, my name is ...’ campaign, supported 
by the Department of Health in the UK, highlights the importance of 
basic introductions on the part of staff members ( Box 1.1).
Further 
1
Diagnosis: the art of being a 
doctor
David Randall, Adam Feather and Mona Waterhouse
Diagnosis in the clinical consultation 1
The medical consultation 1
The initial interaction – forming a rapport 1
Information- gathering 2
Discussion and negotiation around investigations 5
Clinical diagnostic reasoning 6
Models of diagnosis 6
Diagnostic error and patient safety 6
Strategies for avoiding bias  6
Levels of diagnostic depth 7
The role of watchful waiting 7
When not to investigate 8
Diagnostic criteria  8
Overdiagnosis 8
Communicating a diagnosis 9
Explaining diagnoses to patients 9
Breaking bad news 10
Team communication 10
Shared decision- making 11
Managing uncertainty 11
Diagnosis, artificial intelligence and  
the future of medicine 11
CORE SKILLS AND KNOWLEDGE
Being a doctor 
is a privilege; our patients allow us to share in 
their troubles and triumphs, and place their faith in our judge -
ment and skill.
In the 21st century, professional roles and responsibilities are 
rapidly changing, and so defining what it means to be a doctor 
is difficult.
Healthcare is provided by teams, not individuals, and 
other healthcare professionals now perform tasks in assessing 
and managing patients that were previously carried out exclu -
sively by doctors.
The use of artificial intelligence, which applies 
vast, unsorted clinical and academic datasets to produce algo -
rithms that can inform diagnostic and management questions, 
provides a fundamental challenge to the historically crucial role 
of doctors in these areas.
While the process of diagnosis will be increasingly aug -
mented by artificial intelligence, it is unlikely ever to be replaced 
by it because at the centre of any diagnostic conundrum is 
a human being.
Working out what is wrong with a patient 
involves not just technical skills, such as the assimilation of 
information, interpretation of data and use of clinical reasoning 
to reach a diagnosis.
It also requires compassion, empathy, 
trust, respect and humour: the stuff that makes up a relation -
ship between human beings.
And it brings into play an ethi -
cal code developed to ensure that the great power of medical 
knowledge is used for the good of individual patients and of 
society as a whole.
Once a diagnosis is made, the human tasks continue. Doc -
tors tailor their explanations to the needs and understanding of 
their patients.
They negotiate a management strategy and share 
clinical decision- making with the person under their care.
How -
ever medicine evolves in the future, at the centre of everything 
we do must remain the huge privilege and pleasure of caring for, 
supporting, empowering and helping people so that their health 
and social needs are optimally met.
1
 2 Diagnosis: the art of being a doctor
comments expressing empathy, support or care for the patient at 
this point can be very helpful in ensuring that a good rapport is 
established, before proceeding to talk about the problem that has 
led the patient to seek medical help (Box 1.2).
Information- gathering
Once a rapport has been established, the consultation is generally 
divided into three parts: history, examination and investigations/
management.
Depending on the context and the acuity of the situ-
ation, these may occur in isolation, follow on from one another or, in 
severely ill patients, happen synchronously.
The history
In the construction of an accurate diagnosis, nothing is more 
important than taking a full history from the patient.
It is estimated 
that up to 80% of the diagnosis can be made on the basis of a 
careful history alone.
In addition to information- gathering, eliciting 
the history is key to the therapeutic relationship.
If it goes well, the 
patient knows they have been listened to, has had an opportunity 
to convey all of their concerns, and knows that the clinician cares 
for them and will act as their advocate.
This builds mutual trust 
and respect, and helps the patient to undergo invasive or intimate 
procedures and adhere to therapeutic interventions in the future.
A meeting of two experts
It has been said that a medical consultation is a meeting of two 
experts.
A good consultation is based on mutual respect, rejecting 
a traditional paternalistic view of medicine (‘doctor knows best’), 
and assisting joint exploration of the biomedical and the patient 
perspectives on the problem.
This will lead to shared understand -
ing, where clinician and patient jointly grasp what is wrong, what 
impact it is having on the patient’s life, what the patient expects 
from medical intervention, and which options would be best for 
investigating and treating the problem (see Fig. 5.1).
The golden minute
At the start of the consultation the clinician should avoid inter -
rupting the patient for as long as possible.
Patients often men -
tally rehearse a script relating to the symptoms or problems they 
wish to describe.
An early interruption may throw them off course 
and cause them to forget key points, leaving them feeling dis -
satisfied with the interaction.
The term ‘ the golden minute ’ has 
been coined to encourage clinicians to allow patients to tell their 
story uninterrupted for at least 1 minute.
This gives them time to 
describe their symptoms as they have experienced them, includ -
ing information that might be missed if the clinician jumps in too 
soon with closed, focused questions.
Allowing the patient freedom to tell their own story aids clini -
cians in achieving their primary objective of making a diagnosis, 
but ultimately forms and reinforces the therapeutic relationship 
and increases both patient and clinician satisfaction.
Box 1.3 sum-
marizes some techniques that can be used to help patients share 
information in a way that is accurate and comprehensive.
Some will 
Time
Clinical
history and
interview
Physical
examination Communication
of the diagnosis Treatment Outcomes
The explanation of
the health problem
that is communicated
to the patient
The planned path of
care based on the
diagnosis
Patient and
system outcomes
Learning from
diagnostic errors,
near misses and
accurate, timely
diagnoses
Referral and
consultation
Diagnostic
testing
INFORMATION-
GATHERING WORKING
DIAGNOSIS
INFORMATION INTEGRATIONINFORMATION INTEGRATION
AND INTERPRETATION
Has sufficient information been collected?
Patient
experiences
a health
problem
Patient
engages with
healthcare
system
Fig. 1.1 A conceptualization of the diagnostic process.
(From National Academies of Sciences, 
 Engineering, and Medicine. Improving Diagnosis in Health Care. Washington, DC: The National Acad emies 
Press; 2015. https://doi.org.10.17226/21794.)
In 2011, geriatrician Dr Kate Granger was diagnosed with metastatic sarcoma, 
from which she eventually died in 2016. Noticing that many of the healthcare 
staff treating her during her illness failed to introduce themselves, she created 
the ‘Hello, my name is ...’ campaign.
Describing why an initial introduction is 
so important, she said, ‘I firmly believe it is not just about common courtesy, 
but it runs much deeper.
Introductions are about making a human connection 
between one human being who is suffering and vulnerable, and another 
human being who wishes to help.
They begin therapeutic relationships and 
can instantly build trust in difficult circumstances.’
3DXOLQH
The campaign encourages healthcare staff to greet and introduce them -
selves to patients and encourages the wearing of easy- to- read name badges 
like this one.
Box 1.1  The ‘Hello, my name is ...’ campaign
1
The medical consultation 3
have given a lot of thought to their symptoms and come with a well- 
thought- through story;
others may not have reflected much on what 
has been going on, and key information may need to be drawn out 
by sensitive questioning.
Structuring the medical history
Over the last 150 years a formal structure for the recording of the 
patient’s history has evolved.
This has several subsections ( Box 
1.4). While facts may be recorded in this very stylized manner, 
the patient will rarely, if ever, present them in this structure.
It 
is up to the interviewing clinician to assimilate and interpret the 
information fully and to form a considered diagnostic narrative, 
so that when it is presented to others, either verbally or in writ -
ten form, sense can be made of the diagnostic reasoning and 
conclusions.
History of the presenting complaint
The aim is to provide a thorough account of the symptoms that led 
the patient to seek medical attention.
It is vital to listen closely to how 
the symptoms are described and not to miss any clues that can be 
followed up with direct questioning.
For each symptom the patient 
presents with, additional questioning should be used to identify:
	• 		Time course: When did the problem begin?
Does it come and 
go? Is there anything that triggers it?
Is there any variation in 
the symptoms during the day or night?
Has the patient ever had 
anything like this in the past?
Establishing the pattern in which 
symptoms have developed is often one of the most helpful parts 
of the history in helping to form a diagnosis (Box 1.5).
• 		Associated symptoms: What else has the patient noticed? Be-
gin with an open question, and then proceed to asking about 
the presence or absence of relevant symptoms that may help to 
determine the cause of the problem.
• 		Severity, site, radiation and character of any pain: How would 
the patient rate it on a scale from 1 to 10?
Do they describe it 
as tight, dull, electric or burning?
Is it getting worse, staying the 
same or starting to improve?
• 		Responses: What has the patient done about the symptoms?
Have they sought medical advice or used medication that they 
have at home?
The ‘Clinical skills’ sections at the beginning of many of the 
chapters in this book present additional questioning techniques rel-
evant to particular medical specialties.
At this point, asking questions to form a review of 
systems can be valuable in eliciting further symptoms that the 
patient may not have mentioned or not thought relevant (Box 1.6).
Past medical and surgical history
This should include all significant medical conditions, including 
hospital admissions, long- term conditions, life- threatening or life- 
changing conditions, and important investigations, procedures and 
therapeutic interventions (operations, endoscopies, biopsies and 
significant courses of treatment such as chemo-  or radiotherapy).
•		Allow	the	patient	to	tell	their	story,	without	jumping	in	prematurely	with	
 questions.
	 •		Ask	the	patient	specifically	about	their	ideas,	concerns	and	expectations	
(ICE):
	 •	  Ideas: What do they think might be going on?
Have they done any reading 
about their symptoms or asked anyone they know?
	 •	  Concerns:	Are	they	feeling	anxious	or	worried	about	their	symptoms?	
What	is	causing	them	concern?
Are	there	any	particular	areas	where	their	
symptoms might be making life difficult?
	 •	 	Expectations: What are they hoping for from this consultation?
	 •		Try	to	develop	an	understanding	of	who	the	patient	is	as	a	person.
Where,	
and with whom, do they live? What is their occupation? What things do they 
enjoy?
Moments of human connection, such as a shared interest in a place 
or activity, can be powerful in building a relationship between clinician and 
patient.
•		Try	to	convey	empathy	and	concern,	reinforcing	to	the	patient	that	you	are	
their advocate and will do your best to help them.
Box 1.2  Good practice for using the medical history to build a therapeutic relationship
	• 		Begin with open questions (‘Could you tell me more about the pain?’): do 
this before moving to closed questions to help rule certain key problems in or 
out (‘Did the pain get worse after eating?’).
• 		Emphasize your active listening: maintain eye contact, nod, acknowledge 
key points, and respond to comments the patient might make that are 
humorous or sad.
• 		Respond to the patient’s body language: note whether the patient 
 becomes distressed or embarrassed.
If so, acknowledge this and look for 
ways to address it.
•		Empathize: try to show the patient that you care about what they are going 
through.
Put yourself in their shoes: how might they be feeling?
Communicate 
this: ‘Thanks for sharing this – it must be difficult not knowing what is going on.’
	• 		Summarize: run through what the patient has told you, to make sure nothing 
has been missed out.
• 		Signpost: explain what you have just covered and what you are now going 
on to explore, and why.
• 		Use plain English: avoid medical jargon or complicated vocabulary, unless it 
is clear that the patient is able to understand this.
Box 1.3  Strategies in history- taking
	 •		Presenting	complaint:	why	has	the	patient	sought	medical	advice?
	 •		History	of	the	presenting	complaint:	further	information	about	the	
patient’s main problem
	 •		Past	medical	and	surgical	history
	 •		Drug	history	and	allergies
	 •		Family	history
	 •		Social	history:	information	on	the	patient’s	present	living	arrangements	
and relevant risk factors
Box 1.4  A structured approach to information- gathering 
in the medical history
Onset of symptoms Possible causes
Immediate (seconds to 
minutes)
Vascular – thrombotic or embolic
Anatomical – e.g.
perforation of a viscus
Electrical – e.g. dysrhythmias, seizures
Hours to days Bacterial or viral infections
Inflammatory and autoimmune diseases
Weeks to months Malignant disease
Inflammatory and autoimmune diseases
Chronic infections, e.g.
mycobacterial
Months to years Degenerative conditions
Fibrotic diseases
Box 1.5  Using the time course of symptoms to suggest an 
underlying cause
1
 4 Diagnosis: the art of being a doctor
If the patient has had any surgical interventions a comprehensive 
anaesthetic history should be sought and recorded.
Five good 
questions to ask about chronic conditions are listed in Box 1.7.
Drug history
Document all medications the patient has been taking, including pre-
scribed, over- the- counter and herbal or traditional treatments.
Record 
when each was started, along with the dosing regimen; ask about side- 
effects and adherence to treatment.
When you are unsure or ignorant 
of a drug, it is essential to research and record the class, common 
side- effects and interactions.
Medication error is a common cause of 
morbidity and mortality, and ignorance is no defence.
Ask about and 
record drug allergies, including the timing and nature of any reactions.
Family history
This is particularly relevant when assessing younger patients or 
when the differential diagnosis includes possible genetic conditions.
It is essential to record the structure of the patient’s family in detail, 
including the patient’s and parents’ siblings, any ‘half- siblings’ 
(genetically related to only one of the patient’s parents), and where 
relevant, a history of consanguinity.
Once this is completed, confirm 
which of these relatives have been affected by a given condition or 
by premature death (see p. 13).
Social history
The social history has two key purposes:
	• 		Establishing whether there are any environmental factors  
that may be causative or exacerbating the patient’s symptoms.
Always ask about housing, occupation, tobacco smoking, alcohol 
intake, and use of recreational and illicit drugs.
Where relevant, 
draw up a travel history, including animal and insect bites, a sex-
ual history (if a sexually transmitted disease, including HIV infec-
tion, is suspected), and hobbies, leisure activities and pets.
• 		Understanding more about the lifestyle of the patient. Where 
do they live? How active are they?
Are they limited in any daily 
activities by physical or mental health problems? Do they have 
informal or formal carers?
If so, how often do the carers attend 
and what do they do for the patient?
Physical examination
The physical examination, including any objective observations, 
should be used to confirm or refute the initial diagnosis/diagnoses 
made from the history.
It is a key part of all medical interactions but 
its duration and extent will be guided by the patient’s history and the 
acuity of the presentation.
Even in the era of complex technological investigations a care -
ful physical examination performs a number of key functions, 
including:
	 •		Providing	objective	evidence	(physical	signs)	to	complement	
subjective evidence (symptoms) from the history.
Sometimes a 
Conducting a brief but comprehensive ‘review of systems’ may be a particularly 
useful schema when the patient has non- specific symptoms, e.g.
weight loss, 
tiredness and weakness, or when someone reports ‘I just don’t feel right, doctor’.
Respiratory
Cough, sputum (volume, frequency, consistency, colour, offensive taste or smell), 
haemoptysis (volume, frequency, consistency, colour, freshness, altered nature, 
clots), shortness of breath, exercise tolerance, orthopnoea, wheeze, chest pain 
Cardiovascular
Chest pain, shortness of breath, cough, sputum, orthopnoea, swelling of ankles 
(peripheral oedema) or abdomen (ascites), paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea, 
palpitations 
Gastrointestinal
General – normal and present weight, appetite, oral intake
Upper – dysphagia (level: high – base of neck, mid and lower chest),  consistency 
of food tolerated/not tolerated), dyspepsia, odynophagia, upper abdominal pain, 
early satiety, nausea/vomiting (volume, frequency,  consistency – unaltered 
food (regurgitation), altered food, blood),  haematemesis (volume, frequency, 
 consistency, colour, freshness, 
altered nature, clots)
Lower – lower abdominal pain, altered bowel habit, constipation, diarrhoea 
(volume, frequency, consistency, colour), blood per rectum, mucus per 
rectum, anal pain 
Hepatobiliary and pancreatic
Jaundice, associated pain, pruritus, symptoms of encephalopathy, abdominal 
swelling (ascites) 
Renal
Urine (frequency, volume, colour, offensive odour), dysuria, haematuria (volume, 
frequency, colour, freshness, clots), symptoms of bladder outflow tract 
obstruction (hesitancy, frequency, small volume, terminal dribbling) 
Musculoskeletal
Bone pains, back pain and stiffness, joint stiffness, swelling, pain, erythema, 
patterns of joints involved, muscular pain, weakness, acute pain suggesting 
pathological or fragility fractures 
Dermatological
Rashes, blisters, ulcers 
Endocrine
Diabetic symptoms and complications, sexual function, menstruation, symptoms 
of thyroid dysfunction 
Neurological
Seizures, muscle weakness, involuntary movements, loss 
of sensation, altered 
gait, speech and swallowing dysfunction 
Ophthalmic
Eye pain, redness, dryness or grittiness, changes in vision, flashing lights 
Ear, nose and throat
Changes in smell, taste or hearing, pain in ears, nose, throat or sinuses, nasal 
discharge or crusting 
Haematological
Easy bleeding or bruising, tiredness, lymph node swelling, abdominal fullness 
(splenomegaly) 
Mental health
Mood (suicidality when relevant), anxiety, altered perceptions (hallucinations), 
abnormal beliefs (delusions) 
Genitourinary
Urethral or vaginal discharge, pain or itching, pain during sexual intercourse, 
sexual function, in women – menstrual cycle, use of contraception, history of 
pregnancies and childbirth
Box 1.6  Review of systems
 1.  Diagnosis – HOW, WHY, WHERE and WHEN was your condition 
first 
diagnosed?
 2.  Progression – How has it progressed since?
3.  Control – How do you monitor your condition? Which healthcare 
professionals are involved with your care?
When did you last have 
a check- up? What medications do you take?
What are your biggest 
challenges in controlling your condition?
 4.  The good and the bad – What is the BEST and WORST your condition 
has ever been?
How does it have an impact on your life?
 5.  Today/recently – How have you been?
If unwell, have you ever been 
this unwell before? What happened when you were last this unwell?
Box 1.7  Five questions for the patient with a long- term 
condition
1
The medical consultation 5
firm diagnosis can be made almost solely on the basis of exami-
nation findings, such as in a number of skin disorders.
•		Assessing	the	severity	or	extent	of	problems.
	 •		Identifying	unexpected	findings	that	patients	themselves	have	
not noticed.
	 •		Building	rapport	with	patients.	The	value	of	performing	a	physi-
cal examination can be significant in reinforcing to patients that 
they have been dealt with thoroughly and compassionately.
Typically a general assessment will be made as the history is 
being elicited (Is the patient well or unwell? Are there any obvious 
clinical signs?).
This will be aided by a set of formal observations 
(blood pressure, heart rate, oxygen saturation, respiratory rate, 
level of consciousness, capillary blood glucose and temperature).
A more detailed assessment is then carried out, including a ‘general 
examination’ (hands, upper limbs, face and neck), examination of 
the likely affected system(s) as suggested by the history, and finally 
a wider examination of other organ systems.
Fig. 1.2 outlines a typical general and systematic examination 
routine suitable for use in patients presenting with a wide range of 
medical conditions.
The ‘Clinical skills’ sections at the beginning of 
many of the chapters in this book offer tailored versions of this basic 
routine relevant to patients with specific types of complaint.
Discussion and negotiation around 
investigations
In the modern era, there are a huge number of investigations avail -
able to the clinician, ranging from simple bedside tests such as spi-
rometry or urine dipstick analysis, through to complex radiological 
1. Initial impressions on approaching the 
patient, or as they come into the 
consultation area – the 'end of the bed’:
• Establish whether the patient is well or 
unwell.
Why?
• Perform observations (temperature, 
heart rate, blood pressure, respiratory 
rate, oxygen saturations, Glasgow Coma 
Scale (GCS) or ACVPU score  – 
combined into the National Early 
Warning Score (NEWS-2, see p. 204)
• Carry out a feet-to-face examination – 
spend 30 seconds looking the patient up 
and down, noting any striking 
abnormalities – facial asymmetry, scars, 
deformities, skin lesions, amputations, 
sweating, breathlessness, discomfort
• Look for clinical clues around the bed – 
oxygen, intravenous fluids, sputum pot, 
urinary catheter
2. Hands:
• Look for peripheral signs of 
serious conditions like 
infective endocarditis or 
chronic liver disease
• Feel the temperature of the 
hands and 
the volume of the 
pulse to begin to assess the 
patient’s volume status
3. Face:
• Assess for signs of systemic conditions, including pallor and 
cyanosis
• Inspect the mouth and standards of dental care
• Consider the need for examination of some or all cranial nerves
4. Neck:
• Assess the jugular venous pressure (see p.
1031)
• Ensure that the trachea is central
• Palpate for cervical and supraclavicular lymphadenopathy 
or other masses
5. Heart:
• Palpate the apex beat and examine for heaves and thrills
• Auscultate for heart sounds, performing additional 
manœuvres as necessary
6. Chest:
• Examine for chest expansion and abnormal movement
• Auscultate throughout both lung fields;
consider other 
manœuvres such as percussion note or vocal fremitus if 
necessary
7. Abdomen:
• Inspect for obvious masses, distension or asymmetry, and for 
signs of medical intervention such as operative scars or a 
stoma bag
• Palpate gently for tenderness and masses
• Assess for organomegaly;
assess other features (e.g. pulses, 
bruits, ascites) as necessary
8. Limbs:
• Inspect for skin changes and deformity;
assess the joints
• Assess for peripheral oedema
• Check peripheral pulses
• Consider the need for formal examination of the peripheral 
nervous system
9. Functional assessment:
• Note any difficulty the patient may have with: 
1. Speech and language;
swallowing problems
2. Undressing and dressing during the examination
3. Sit to stand, transfers and mobility – note any mobility aids 
or assistance required
Fig. 1.2 A basic approach to clinical examination.
1
 6 Diagnosis: the art of being a doctor
imaging and invasive procedures such as endoscopy or angiography.
Some tests may combine both diagnostic and therapeutic potential. 
Choosing appropriate and cost- effective interventions that maximize 
diagnostic yield, while minimizing the burden on the patient and the 
cost to providers, can be challenging, and each chapter in this book 
will provide guidance in specific contexts.
For any test that is being considered, a number of questions are 
relevant:
	• 		What question will this test help to answer?
Only the most 
basic of tests should be performed routinely.
For all others, it 
is helpful to have clear diagnostic questions in mind, and of -
ten specialists, such as diagnostic radiologists, can help with 
choosing the most appropriate investigation to answer the rel -
evant question in a particular patient context.
• 		What is the sensitivity and specificity of the test?
A highly 
sensitive test will correctly identify a high proportion of patients 
with a given disease (true positives);
a highly specific test will 
correctly identify a high proportion of those who do not have the 
disease (true negatives).
For example, in the diagnosis of venous 
thromboembolism (VTE, see Ch. 29 ), measurement of serum  
D- dimer has a high sensitivity (a positive result picks out almost 
all patients with VTE) but a low specificity (many of those with a 
positive D- dimer do not have VTE).
Since D- dimer measurement 
is cheap, it is a useful screening test (because a negative test 
effectively rules out VTE);
a positive test is followed up by a high- 
sensitivity test, such as venous Doppler ultrasound or computed 
tomography pulmonary angiography (CTPA).
• 		What are the risks of the test to the patient?
All ionizing radia-
tion carries a small risk of future malignant disease, and invasive 
procedures may cause bleeding, infection or injury to internal or-
gans.
These dangers, along with the benefits of the investigation 
result, need to be discussed with patients to help them make a 
good decision.
• 		How much certainty is needed?  Where highly burdensome 
treatment is contemplated (such as surgery or chemotherapy 
for cancer), it is usually necessary to obtain a formal histologi -
cal  diagnosis by tissue biopsy before starting treatment.
If such 
treatment would not be appropriate, then undergoing invasive 
diagnostic procedures may not be appropriate either.
Further reading
Department of Health. ‘Hello, my name is …’ Campaign. https://www.health- ni.go
v.uk/articles/hello- my- name.
Glynn M, Drake WM (eds).
Hutchinson’s Clinical Methods: An Integrated 
Approach to Clinical Practice. Edinburgh: Elsevier; 2018.
Kurtz S, Silverman J, Benson J et al .
Marrying content and process in clinical 
method teaching: enhancing the Calgary- Cambridge guides. Acad Med 2003; 
78:802–809.
McKelvey I. The consultation hill: a new model to aid teaching consultation skills. 
Br J Gen Pract 2010; 60:538–540.
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine . Improving 
Diagnosis in Health Care. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press;
2015.  
CLINICAL DIAGNOSTIC REASONING
Forming a diagnosis involves a complex process of reasoning.
Large 
amounts of information gathered from the history, examination and 
available investigation results need to be assimilated and synthe -
sized into a working diagnosis.
Each piece of evidence should be 
weighed according to the degree of confidence you have in its 
accuracy, and no significant findings should remain unexplained.
If you, as the treating clinician, are unable to make sense of the 
information presented to you, you should be humble and insightful 
enough to seek help from others.
Models of diagnosis
A traditional model of medical diagnosis suggests that a clinician 
should begin by considering all possible causes of a particular pre-
senting symptom, and use information gathered from the diagnostic 
process to include and exclude likely causes gradually, using proba-
bilistic reasoning, until only one remains ( Fig. 1.3A).
According to 
the insights of the Nobel Prize- winning psychologist and economist 
Daniel Kahneman, this is ‘type 2 thinking’, and the kind of thinking 
we like to imagine that we carry out all the time: logical, deductive 
and rational.
An alternative model suggests that diagnosis proceeds instead 
primarily by pattern recognition, the kind of ‘type 1 thinking’ that 
allows humans to make quick judgements of new situations by 
comparing them with similar situations encountered in the past.
In 
this form of diagnostic reasoning, clinicians rapidly compare the 
patient presenting to them with many other patients they have seen 
previously, subconsciously drawing on similarities and differences 
to form an initial impression that is then tested as further information 
becomes available (Fig. 1.3B).
In reality, a combination of these two approaches gener -
ally occurs: an initial rapid impression is formed, chiefly by type 
1 thinking, which is subsequently revised by the slower, more 
reason- based type 2 thinking where the initial diagnosis proves 
inadequate.
This ‘back to the drawing board’ approach, which 
draws on the strengths of both types of thinking, has been sug -
gested as the best model for safe diagnosis – where a working 
diagnosis is continually re- evaluated as new evidence becomes 
available (Fig. 1.3C).
Type 1 thinking is prone to bias (see later), where it is assumed 
that everything new must be similar to things seen before.
It is cru -
cial for doctors to re- evaluate an initial diagnosis actively in situ -
ations where things ‘don’t quite fit’ rather than persisting with a 
hastily formed assumption that may prove incorrect.
Diagnostic error and patient safety
It has been estimated that 10–15% of medical diagnoses are 
wrong.
Misdiagnosis or delayed diagnosis can be the cause of sig-
nificant patient harm, including adverse effects from unnecessary 
treatment or failure to receive an appropriate timely intervention.
While misdiagnosis may occur as a result of inadequate clinical 
knowledge or (particularly in resource- poor settings) through a 
lack of diagnostic resources, it also arises as a direct result of one 
or more cognitive biases.
Box 1.8 lists a number of common cog -
nitive biases, applied to the field of diagnostic reasoning, which 
together form a key avoidable source of medical harm, termed 
‘human error’.
Strategies for avoiding bias
Various strategies can be employed in order to reduce the chances 
of making an incorrect diagnosis:
	• 		Adopting an iterative approach, in which all previous diagno -
ses are subjected to appropriate re- evaluation, especially if evi-
dence appears that brings them into question.
• 		Team discussions, where all team members are empowered to 
challenge the reasoning of more senior clinicians.
Multidisciplinary 
team meetings bring clinicians from different specialties together 
with allied healthcare professionals to ensure that all relevant 
1
Clinical diagnostic reasoning 7
knowledge and expertise is shared in a collaborative environment.
Leaders of healthcare teams have a particular responsibility to 
‘flatten the authority gradient’ and empower more junior members 
to contribute knowledge and ideas to team discussions.
• 		Diagnostic criteria and guidelines , where robust standards 
are outlined to ensure that potential diagnoses are correctly as -
signed and similar conditions are differentiated from each other.
• 		Considering patient problems in language devoid of as -
sumption, as far as possible, seeking to describe a patient’s 
problems succinctly and objectively without recourse to previ -
ous diagnostic reasoning.
• 		Using lists of disease classes to avoid jumping to conclu -
sions: simple aides- mémoire encourage clinicians to consider, 
for example, malignant, infectious, vascular, metabolic, inflam -
matory and degenerative causes of a particular problem.
Levels of diagnostic depth
A clinical impression is formed by taking a comprehensive history 
and undertaking a relevant physical examination.
Drawing on the 
information gathered, clinicians may typically assign a widely under-
stood umbrella term to categorize a collection of signs and symp -
toms into a clinical entity: for example, ‘acute coronary syndrome’, 
‘delirium’, ‘upper respiratory tract infection’ or ‘sepsis’.
Some 
patient presentations do not fall neatly into boxes, and so sticking 
with a narrative description of the patient’s problems is appropri -
ate in some cases.
However, naming a clinical impression in a few 
simple words is often vital in moving towards a final diagnosis.
An impression formed at the end of a clinical consultation can 
often be refined by simple, quick and relatively non- invasive tests;
but it might require complex, expensive or potentially hazardous 
investigations to produce a definitive diagnosis.
Likewise, additional 
tests might be needed in order to demonstrate the extent, severity 
or treatment-responsiveness of the condition (Fig. 1.4).
Often, it is appropriate to stop at the level of a syndrome or clini-
cal impression rather than continuing with investigations to demon-
strate a precise histopathological cause.
This might be the case if:
	 •		the	patient	is	satisfied	with	this	level	of	explanation	and	declines	
further diagnostic work- up
	 •		the	problem	is	mild	or	self-	limiting
	 •		further	investigation	is	unlikely	to	yield	a	specific	cause,	e.g.
where	
a patient with acute but resolving diarrhoea or vomiting is diag -
nosed with likely viral gastroenteritis without a specified pathogen
	 •		further	investigation	is	unlikely	to	influence	management,	e.g.
if	
none of the specific pathological processes that cause the con-
dition is amenable to active management
	 •		treatment	is	possible,	but	the	patient	is	very	frail	and	the	pro-
posed investigations or treatments are felt, after discussion with 
the patient, to be inappropriate.
The role of watchful waiting
All diseases have a natural history.
Some progress inexorably, some 
are self- limiting and some relapse and remit.
Where there is diagnostic 
uncertainty, there can be a role for waiting to see how events develop 
before reaching for a diagnostic label.
Indeed, this is sometimes 
A patient presents with 
a clinical problem
Deductive reasoning based on progressive 
evaluation of evidence reduces many potential 
diagnoses to a final correct one (Type 2 thinking)
The traditional model of diagnosis A
B
C
This hypothesis is 
subsequently tested 
against further 
findings, and either 
confirmed or refuted
Pattern-based diagnosis
A combined approach
A patient presents with 
a clinical problem
Early on in the consultation, one diagnosis (or more) 
is considered likely by pattern recognition, based on 
previous clinical experience (Type 1 thinking)
A patient presents with 
a clinical problem
Often a diagnosis is readily apparent by 
pattern recognition but sometimes the 
presentation does not fully match 
any 
common or previously encountered 
conditions
Clinical information is re-evaluated 
and alternative (perhaps rarer) 
possibilities are considered
Fig. 1.3 Approaches to diagnosis.
(A) The traditional model of diagnosis. (B) Pattern- based 
 diagnosis. (C) A combined approach.
1
 8 Diagnosis: the art of being a doctor
necessary, as the diagnostic criteria for some diseases stipulate that 
symptoms must have been present for a certain length of time before 
a diagnostic label can be assigned.
For instance, in multiple sclerosis, 
where an initial presentation with symptoms suggestive of a demyelin-
ating illness is usually termed a ‘clinically isolated syndrome’, some 
patients will suffer no further episodes while others will progress to 
multiple sclerosis.
In other cases, it is wise to defer risky or burden-
some investigations until the clinical course of the disease makes it 
clear that such investigations are justified.
Watching and waiting can 
be a valid approach only if, firstly, the patient’s clinical condition allows 
it;
and secondly, it does not involve withholding treatment that would 
otherwise be of benefit (Box 1.9).
Discussion with the patient is crucial. 
When not to investigate
Decisions about whether and how to pursue a formal diagnosis are 
often complex and should be made in conjunction with the patient.
Everyone is different and individuals differ in their willingness to tol-
erate uncertainty, with some wanting to seek a firm diagnosis at all 
costs, and others happy to accept a presumed diagnosis and run the 
risk that this may be wrong.
Clinicians can guide patients in making 
complex decisions by helping them understand the likely or possible 
outcomes of different decisions;
often, offering ‘best-  and worst- case 
scenarios’ for different potential courses of action is helpful.
In gen-
eral, investigations should be avoided where:
	 •		the	patient	is	too	frail	to	derive	any	benefit	from	confirming	a	
diagnosis
	 •		the	patient	agrees	to	have	an	initial	investigation,	but	will	not	
 accept intervention if the result is positive, e.g.
the patient agrees 
to a myocardial perfusion scan but would not want to undergo 
subsequent coronary angiography or stenting
	 •		the	treating	clinician	feels	that	investigation	is	not	deemed	to	be	
in the patient’s best interests – patients can refuse investigation 
or intervention, but cannot demand it.
Diagnostic criteria
Some conditions are diagnosed with a single pathognomonic inves-
tigation result: for example, the presence of urate crystals on micro-
scopic examination of synovial fluid is diagnostic of gout.
In other 
situations, confirming the diagnosis is far more complex and may 
require a combination of symptoms, physical signs and investiga -
tion results.
For example, according to the 2018 diagnostic criteria 
for systemic lupus erythematosus, published jointly by the Ameri -
can College of Rheumatology and European League Against Rheu-
matism, patients need to score ten or more points from different 
domains, including symptoms, signs, haematological and immuno-
logical blood tests, and histology (see p. 440).
Diagnostic criteria have a range of functions beyond treat -
ing individual patients, including a role in public health (in the 
compil ation of statistics for monitoring trends in the incidence 
and distribution of diseases), research (to allow study of diseases 
and treatments in well- defined disease populations), and remu -
neration or reimbursement (in many health systems, payment to 
healthcare providers is on the basis of diagnostic codes assigned 
to patients receiving care).
The International Statistical Classifica -
tion of Diseases  (ICD), now in its 11th edition, is produced by 
the World Health Organization in order to provide a standardized 
set of coding and diagnostic criteria across the world.
Although 
useful at a population level, and for the research and administra -
tive purposes described, these criteria are rarely used in routine 
clinical practice.
Overdiagnosis
Overdiagnosis refers to a diagnosis that is correctly assigned on 
the basis of a screening programme, but is inappropriate because 
it is unlikely ever to cause harm to the patient in question.
It is the 
inevitable result of population health screening and poses risks to 
patients because of the potential for unnecessary further diagnostic 
procedures, therapy, or insurance charges.
For example, a frail 93- year- old man with dementia is visited at 
home by his GP at the request of his daughter.
A routine check 
reveals a heart rate of 66 bpm and a blood pressure of 168/96 mmHg.
A diagnosis of hypertension is made and the elderly man is started 
on an antihypertensive.
This diagnosis may be considered inappro-
priate on a number of grounds:
	 •		While	blood	pressure	rises	with	age,	‘normal’	blood	pressure	in	a	
93- year- old is not clearly defined;
neither is an acceptable target 
blood pressure to guide intervention.
• 		Anchoring: Relying too heavily on a piece of information offered early 
as	a	potential	explanation.
For	example,	a	elderly	patient	is	sent	to	
hospital by their GP with a ‘suspected chest infection’ and the doctor 
in the emergency department fails to consider other possible causes of 
breathlessness, such as heart failure or pulmonary embolus.
• 		Availability:	Assuming	that	because	certain	explanations	spring	easily	to	
mind,	they	are	likely	to	be	correct.	For	example,	a	doctor	assumes	that	a	
patient presenting with acute kidney injury is dehydrated and administers 
intravenous fluids, even in the absence of evidence to support this, 
because of unfamiliarity with less common causes of this presentation, 
such as renal parenchymal disease.
• 		Framing: Making decisions in different ways, depending on whether a 
choice	is	presented	in	positive	or	negative	terms.
For	example,	a	doctor	
may respond differently to a radiology report of an incidentally discov-
ered adrenal mass that is reported as ‘probably benign’, compared to the 
same mass if the report reads ‘unable to exclude malignancy’.
• 		Optimism:	Assuming	that	negative	outcomes	will	occur	at	a	lower	rate	
than	they	really	do.	For	example,	a	junior	doctor	may	fail	to	call	for	senior	
help with a clearly deteriorating patient because of an unrealistically 
positive  expectation that the interventions they have instituted will 
improve the situation.
• 		Recency bias: Remembering most easily things that have happened 
most	recently.
For	example,	a	doctor	may	be	distracted	away	from	a	
common diagnosis by a much rarer one, which was covered in a recent 
teaching session they attended.
	• 		Substitution:	An	easier	(and	related)	question	is	solved	in	place	of	a	
more	difficult	one.
For	example,	a	patient	with	a	history	of	intravenous	
drug use presents with worsening headache, although a CT scan of their 
head is normal.
Rather than address a computationally difficult question 
(why does this patient still have a headache?), a simpler question is 
solved (might they simply be seeking opiate analgesia?).
• 		The sunk- cost fallacy: Continuing to invest in a failing idea because 
of	significant	prior	investment.
For	example,	a	cardiologist	recommends	
that a patient undergo high- risk elective valve replacement, despite col-
leagues suggesting conservative management because of the patient’s 
co- morbidities.
The procedure is unsuccessful and the patient suffers 
significant complications, but the doctor subsequently recommends a 
second procedure rather than conservative management, in order to try 
to salvage something from the situation.
Adapted	from	Kahneman	D.	Thinking, Fast and Slow.	New	York:	Farrar,	Strauss	and	
Giroux; 2012.
Box 1.8  Cognitive biases leading to misdiagnosis
1
Communicating a diagnosis 9
	•	 	A	one-	off	high	blood	pressure	measurement	may	have	several	
confounding factors, including stress on being examined by the 
doctor.
It would require further follow- up to corroborate this finding.
•		Hypertension	is	known	to	increase	the	risk	of	cardiovascular	dis-
ease and stroke significantly when left untreated for a period of 
years in younger patients, but it is far from certain that this pat -
tern is seen in newly diagnosed hypertension in the elderly.
•		All	medications	have	side-	effects:	those	of	commonly	used	anti-
hypertensive drugs include postural dizziness that may lead to 
falls, and increased susceptibility to acute kidney injury.
These 
may significantly outweigh any benefits of treatment.
Some have argued that there is no such thing as overdiag-
nosis, only ‘overtreatment’.
Certainly, in this clinical scenario, little 
evidence exists to support the diagnosis or treatment.
As any good 
geriatrician will confirm, there is art as well as science involved in 
intervening wisely in a complex situation such as this.
Further reading
Bulliard JL, Chiolero A. Screening and overdiagnosis: public health implications. 
Public Health Rev 2015; 36:8.
Kahneman D. Thinking, Fast and Slow. New York: Strauss and Giroux; 2012.
Norman G, Barraclough K, Dolovich L et al.  Iterative diagnosis.
BMJ 2009; 
339:b3490.
O’Sullivan ED, Schofield SJ. Cognitive bias in clinical medicine. J R Coll 
Physicians Edinb 2018; 48:225–232.
Saposnik G, Redelmeier D, Ruff CC et al.  Cognitive biases associated with 
medical decisions: a systematic review.
BMC Med Inform Decis Mak 2016; 16:138. 
COMMUNICATING A DIAGNOSIS
Towards the end of a clinical consultation, the clinician will need to 
explain their diagnostic reasoning to the patient, along with their 
plans for further investigation and intervention.
Explaining and 
teaching is a key part of working in medicine, and this part of the 
consultation is crucial in laying the foundation on which decisions 
for the future can be made.
Explaining diagnoses to patients
Some patients will have little difficulty in understanding complex 
medical explanations; this should never be assumed, however.
While it is wise to avoid patronizing patients with a good under -
standing, it is generally worth assuming that patients understand 
less rather than more about their condition, and explaining all parts 
of the reasoning process, at least in brief.
Using a phrase like ‘I 
know you understand lots about this already, but I’m just going to 
go over things right from the beginning so we both understand each 
other’ can be a good way of giving simple explanations without 
causing embarrassment.
Explaining a patient’s diagnosis is best done in chunks, waiting 
between each chunk to ensure they have understood ( Box 1.10).
It 
is wise to work chronologically through the symptoms, employing 
Fig. 1.4 Examples of different levels of diagnosis.
Patient presents to
hospital with acute
central chest pain
Diagnosis: acute
coronary syndrome
Electrocardiogram
performed and serum
troponin measured in
emergency department
Diagnosis: ST-elevation
myocardial infarction
Percutaneous angiography
and echocardiography
performed at local cardiac
unit
Diagnosis: acute
thrombosis of left anterior
descending artery,
impaired left ventricular
function
Patient sees their
general practitioner,
complaining of
fatigue
Diagnosis: tiredness,
unclear cause
A routine panel of blood
tests is ordered by the
doctor.
Diagnosis: iron
deficiency anaemia
Upper and lower
endoscopies with mucosal
biopsies are performed
urgently to exclude
gastrointestinal malignancy
Diagnosis: duodenal ulcer
secondary to 
Helicobacter
pylori infection, with slow
chronic blood loss
	• 		A 77- year- old woman is undergoing CT scanning of the coronary 
arteries after an episode of chest pain.
A	small	(<10	mm)	pulmonary	
nodule is incidentally noted. She is at high risk for lung cancer because 
of a long smoking history.
In accordance with the British Thoracic 
Society’s ‘Guidelines for the Investigation and Management of Pulmonary 
Nodules’, she is offered computed tomography screening at 3 months 
and 1 year.
These reveal stable appearances with no increase in size, so 
she is reassured and discharged from further follow- up of this nodule.
• 		A 34- year- old man is found to have abnormal liver function tests 
and is referred to a hepatology clinic.
A	set	of	blood	tests	screening 	
for common causes of liver disease, including viral hepatitis antibodies, 
are	all	normal.
A	liver	biopsy	is	discussed	with	the	patient, 	but	because	
his liver function tests are not rapidly deteriorating, a decision is made 
in favour of watchful waiting.
Two months later, his liver function tests 
return to normal ranges and remain normal after another 6 months.
He is discharged from clinic without a diagnosis for his transient liver 
injury.
• 		An 18- year- old woman with a history of presumed minimal change 
disease as a child presents to the renal outpatient department with 
recurrent nephrotic syndrome.
She is commenced on a loop diuretic and 
high- dose corticosteroids, but after 2 months remission has not been 
achieved.
Because it is atypical for minimal change disease to fail to 
remit by this point, and because the diagnosis had never before been 
histologically proven, a renal biopsy is carried out.
This revealed a different 
but related renal disorder: focal segmental glomerulosclerosis.
Box 1.9  The role of watchful waiting in diagnosis
1
 10 Diagnosis: the art of being a doctor
causal explanations and tying symptoms to the underlying patho -
logical processes.
This helps patients to understand the clinician’s 
diagnostic reasoning and future priorities in management.
Breaking bad news
Sometimes, clinicians have to tell patients that they have a severe, 
chronic or life- limiting disease.
This might be expected news for the 
patient or it might come as a complete surprise.
This is one of the most 
difficult things a clinician has to do.
It is never a pleasant task but hav-
ing a good structure enables a clinician to be sensitive and kind, and 
leaves the patient knowing that they are not on their own (Box 1.11).
Traditionally, it was commonplace to withhold bad news from 
patients, telling it only to their families.
Such an approach will often 
cause far greater distress to the patient (as a result of being deceived) 
and is now considered unacceptable.
Where patients do not wish to 
be told about their diagnosis, this should be respected, and informa-
tion can be given to family members instead if the patient consents;
often, in such cases, the patient may understand that the news is not 
good and may wish to be spared the full details.
If major treatment 
decisions need to be made and the patient has mental capacity to 
make them, clinicians should do their best to persuade patients of the 
importance of understanding what is wrong with them.
Team communication
Communication of a diagnosis between members of the health -
care team should be succinct and accurate.
Technical terms are 
appropriate, alongside abbreviations, as long as they are widely 
understood.
Often, patients with complex medical histories may 
present with multiple problems, and so clinicians treating them 
may compile a ‘ problem list ’ outlining currently unresolved 
issues ( Box 1.12 ).
This can help to highlight issues that need to 
be resolved, guide investigations and management, and be used 
in communicating a patient’s needs between members of the 
healthcare team.
Beginning with a summary of the clinical presentation, the clinician explains 
their diagnostic reasoning before suggesting what should happen next, ensuring 
after each chunk that the patient understands and agrees.
•		‘So	you	came	in	to	see	me	because	over	the	past	month	you’ve	noticed	pain,	
swelling and stiffness in your hands ...’
	 •		‘When	I	examined	your	hands,	I	found	that	lots	of	the	small	joints	in	your	
fingers were hot, red and swollen, and I also noticed these new swellings 
behind your elbows you hadn’t seen before ...’
	 •		‘Now	I	don’t	know	exactly	what	is	going	on,	but	when	joints	get	red	and	hot	
like this, it often means there is inflammation in the joints – often the body’s 
immune system is attacking something in the joint ...’
	 •		‘I’d	like	to	do	some	blood	tests	to	look	for	evidence	that	the	immune	system	
is causing this, and also get an X- ray of your hands ...’
	 •		‘Once	the	results	are	back,	I’m	going	to	talk	to	a	specialist	rheumatologist	at	
the hospital ...’
	 •		‘It	might	be	that	they	suggest	starting	anti-	inflammatory	medication	over	the	
next few days to try to reduce the swelling and stop it causing any damage 
to the joints ...’
	 •		‘In	the	meantime,	let	me	prescribe	you	some	painkillers	to	try	to	make	things	
more comfortable.’
Box 1.10  ‘Chunking’ the diagnostic process
	 •		Choose	a	setting	that	is	private,	quiet	and	comfortable	–	perhaps	a	relatives’	
room off a main ward, 
after ensuring that you will not be disturbed.
	 •		Ask	the	patient	who	they	would	like	with	them	to	discuss	their	test	results	
– encourage them to bring along a trusted friend or relative.
Try to have at 
least two members of clinical staff present, e.g.
a senior treating doctor and 
a nurse caring for the patient.
•		Set	aside	time	–	ideally,	at	least	20	minutes	–	to	ensure	that	the	discussion	
is not rushed and that questions can be dealt with.
	 •		Introduce	yourself	and	others	present	and	explain	the	purpose	of	the	
meeting, e.g. to go through recent test results.
	 •		Ask	how	the	patient	has	been	since	the	last	time	you	spoke	with	them.
•		Briefly	(in	not	more	than	two	or	three	sentences)	recap	their	history	–	what	
symptoms they presented with and why certain tests were done.
	 •		Fire	a	warning	shot:	explain	that	things	are	looking	more	serious	than	first	
thought.
	 •		Pause.
	 •		Clearly,	briefly	and	in	plain	English,	describe	the	findings,	e.g.
‘I’m	afraid	
that the CT scan revealed there is a lump in your left lung, and the doctor 
reporting the scan thinks that this could be lung cancer.’
	 •		Pause.
•		Be	prepared	for	any	reaction	from	the	patient	–	they	might	break	down	in	
tears, or argue with you, or become angry, or simply deny that what you have 
said	is	true.	Avoid	giving	too	much	more	information	until	they	indicate	they	
are ready.
•		Briefly	outline	the	likely	diagnosis,	any	areas	of	uncertainty	and	the	next	
steps (e.g. further investigations or referral to a specialist).
	 •		Pause.
	 •		Invite	questions.
•		Be	ready	to	answer	the	question	‘How	long	have	I	got?’	It	is	often	impossible	
to say at this stage, and it is generally misleading and inappropriate to give 
specific figures.
It can sometimes be helpful to outline whether a condition is 
survivable, or to give best-  and worst- case scenarios.
•		Give	hope:	explain	what	can	be	done,	even	it	is	simply	a	matter	of	care,	
 support and symptom control. Try to help patients to maintain some control 
over their life, but never make false promises.
•		Empathize:	e.g.	some	patients	like	to	be	touched,	with	a	reassuring	hand	
placed	on	theirs,	while	others	do	not.	Always	try	to	convey	concern	and	
 support explicitly.
	 •		Outline	a	brief	plan:	what	happens	now?	What	should	they	do	if	they	think	of	
questions over the next few hours?
Box 1.11  Breaking bad news
 1.  Right lower lobe pneumonia (presumed aspiration pneumonia, no 
 positive microbiology)
 2.  Impaired swallow, awaiting speech and language therapy assessment
 3.  Previous stroke, right- sided hemiparesis, bedbound
	 4.		Acute	kidney	injury	probably	secondary	to	sepsis	and	hypotension	–	
resolving
 5.  Previously struggling to cope at home despite four- times- daily care 
package;
may require residential nursing care
Box 1.12  Example of a ‘problem list’ in an elderly patient 
admitted to hospital
1
Diagnosis, artificial intelligence and the future of medicine   11
The SBAR tool
Reviews of serious incidents occurring in hospital often highlight 
poor communication between team members as playing a key role 
in subsequent patient harm.
For example, a member of the nurs -
ing staff may notice a deteriorating patient and summon the on- call 
doctor, who may fail to appreciate the severity of the situation and 
therefore not respond in a timely manner.
To address this problem, the SBAR tool has been developed to 
help formalize such communication.
Staff members are encouraged 
to use this to structure their communication, in order to emphasize 
the need for full attention and an adequate response from the pro -
fessional receiving the call.
• 		Situation: who is making the call, which patient does it relate to 
and where are they in the hospital?
• 		Background: why was the patient admitted and what have been 
the recent events?
• 		Assessment: why are you calling, what are the patient’s current 
problems and what assessment have you made of them?
• 		Response: what do you need the person receiving the call to do?
Shared decision- making
Generally a diagnosis will be reached that incorporates information 
from the history, physical examination and relevant investigations.
This will be communicated to the patient by the clinician treat -
ing them, who should check their understanding and discuss the 
implications.
As with history- taking, the patient must be regarded 
and treated as an equal partner.
The concept of shared decision- 
making has been developed to emphasize just how important joint 
involvement is, with benefits for both the healthcare provider and 
the patient (Box 1.13).
For patients to participate as equal partners, it is crucial for 
them to be provided with all the necessary information about their 
condition and the various treatment options available, presented in 
language that is easily understood.
Information leaflets and online 
materials, often produced by patient support groups and charities, 
are available to help achieve this.
Managing uncertainty
Sometimes, it is not possible to make a definitive, corroborated 
diagnosis.
This may be because:
	 •		the	 investigations	 available	 are	 unable	 to	 provide	 definitive	
proof, for example if medicine is being delivered in a resource- 
poor setting
	 •		definitive	investigation	is	avoided	because	of	the	dangers	or	bur-
dens involved
	 •		the	patient	declines	investigation
	 •		investigations	have	commenced	but	will	not	reach	a	conclusion	
for some time.
This can be very difficult for both patients and clinicians.
With -
out a confirmed diagnosis, it is impossible to produce a confident 
prognosis, and this can be profoundly challenging for patients.
It 
can also be unnerving to clinicians to be taken to the point at which 
science can offer nothing more and they are forced to acknowledge 
their limitations.
At this point, the clinician should help the patient 
deal with this lack of closure and uncertainty.
It might be relevant 
to establish what gives the patient’s life meaning, to enquire about 
their religious or spiritual beliefs, or to ask what most concerns them 
about facing their current illness.
In the meantime, plans can be built on the available evidence 
relating to the patient’s underlying illness, guided by key concerns 
expressed by the patient:
	 •		Symptomatic	treatment	(such	as	pain	relief	or	anti-	sickness	drugs)	
is always appropriate when required, and may be a way of restor-
ing a sense of control in an uncertain situation (see Ch. 7).
•		Empirical	treatment	can	be	instituted	on	the	basis	of	a	suspect-
ed underlying pathology, even if a firm diagnosis is not possible.
However, this needs clear discussion with the patient about the 
likelihood that the proposed treatment may cause side- effects, 
and may be ineffective or even harmful if the suspected diag-
nosis is incorrect.
•		If	a	rapidly	life-	limiting	condition,	such	as	advanced	malignancy,	
is suspected, then discussions should begin early about end- of- 
life care. What is important to the patient?
Where would they like 
to be cared for in their final months or weeks?
	 •		Help	from	psychologists	or	chaplains	can	be	of	great	benefit	and	
is often readily available.
Further reading
Baile WF, Buckman R, Lenzi R et al. SPIKES – a six- step protocol for delivering 
bad news: application to the patient with cancer.
Oncologist 2000; 5:302–311.
Hatch S. Uncertainty in medicine. BMJ 2017; 357:j2180.
NHS Improvement. SBAR Communication Tool. https://improvement.nhs.uk/docu
ments/2162/sbar- communication- tool.pdf.
NICE.
Shared Decision Making Guidelines. https://www.nice.org.uk/about/what- 
we- do/our- programmes/nice- guidance/nice- guidelines/shared- decision- making.
DIAGNOSIS, ARTIFICIAL  
INTELLIGENCE AND THE FUTURE  
OF MEDICINE
Artificial intelligence (AI) describes the ability of machines to 
perform tasks traditionally believed to require higher cognitive 
skills.
Examples include natural language processing, learning, 
executive planning and pattern recognition.
Although multiple 
predictions are made about the future powers of self- conscious 
computers and ‘super- intelligences’, all the AI technology avail -
able currently, and in the near future, may be described as ‘narrow 
AI’ or ‘weak AI’: that is, systems designed to augment specified 
tasks within limited and well- defined fields of activity.
The basis of 
all AI systems lies in the ability of high- capacity computer systems 
to analyse and utilize trends in large datasets that correlate with 
predefined outputs, ‘seeing’ patterns in data that possess predic -
tive significance but are invisible to human observers.
AI systems 
are ‘fed’ data and use this to develop and refine rules that predict 
the outputs they are designed to detect.
Benefits for the patient
	 •		Better	understanding	of	the	different	treatment	options	available	and	
their benefits and risks
	 •		A	feeling	of	empowerment	as	different	options	are	explored
	 •		A	treatment	plan	tailored	to	the	patient’s	individual	needs 
Benefits for the healthcare provider
	 •		A	better	understanding	of	what	things	are	most	important	to	this	
 individual patient
	 •		Better	patient	engagement	with	the	illness	and	its	management
	 •		Better	adherence	to	prescribed	medication
Box 1.13  Benefits of shared decision- making
1
 12 Diagnosis: the art of being a doctor
AI systems in healthcare
A number of such narrow AI systems have been trialled with encour-
aging results in different areas of medical practice:
	• 		‘Computer vision’ .
These AI systems review large numbers 
of medical images with appropriate diagnostic labels supplied 
by experts, and build diagnostic algorithms based on features 
of the image that correlate with the assigned diagnosis.
Such 
systems have been shown to perform as well as, or better 
than, human experts in a number of clinical settings, including 
the interpretation of electrocardiograms, the diagnosis of skin 
 cancers, the recognition of abnormalities on retinal screening 
photographs, and the reporting of chest X- rays and other radio-
logical images.
• 		Risk prediction. These AI systems consider large sets of patient 
data (age, sex, ethnicity, environmental risk factors, physiologi -
cal observations, results of blood tests and other investigations, 
administered medications) and correlate these with patient out -
comes to form powerful predictive tools.
Patterns are detected 
that may have previously been overlooked by human research -
ers, such as beat- to- beat heart rate variation, which correlates 
strongly with mortality and development of sepsis in patients in 
critical care settings.
Similar algorithms have been shown to be 
effective in predicting in- hospital complications and mortality, 
out- of- hospital events (such as 10- year cardiovascular mortal -
ity) and even less obvious outcomes (such as suicide risk).
• 		Individualized treatment . No two patients suffer exactly the 
same disease and yet patients with the same diagnosis are 
generally, at present, offered the same treatment options.
AI 
systems have been developed that analyse a large volume of 
patient data (relating, for example, to patients’ whole- genome 
sequences or samples from tumours), allowing genetic 
variants to be identified that predict the likely responses to 
 different types of treatment.
These allow treatment regimens 
to be tailored to individual patients, maximizing efficacy and 
 minimizing toxicity.
Future uses of AI
All of the currently and imminently available AI systems simply pres-
ent clinicians with suggestions: probabilities that might suggest 
a diagnosis, or quantify a set of risks, or identify treatments most 
likely to be of benefit.
As such, these AI systems provide doctors 
with a helpful ‘ second opinion ’, from a unique, non- human per-
spective.
The key ethical issue of deciding what to do next falls to 
the patient and doctor, working collaboratively.
However, other AI technologies are being developed that pose 
far greater ethical questions about the role that machines should 
play in healthcare.
Although these are presently far off, some devel-
opers envisage robotic systems that would almost completely 
replace human doctors: patients would tell a computer system their 
symptoms, undergo whatever investigations were required, and 
receive an automated, algorithm- driven diagnosis and manage -
ment plan.
These systems would use natural language processing 
to review all relevant medical literature, and make use of this data to 
identify exactly which treatment would be most appropriate for the 
patient in question.
In the social care sector, robotic systems are already being 
designed that provide ‘care’ and ‘companionship’ for elderly, dis -
abled or cognitively impaired people.
Other systems administer 
talking- based therapy to patients with mood disorders such as 
depression.
Does this represent a good use of technology, reducing 
the cost and improving the quality of care?
Or is there something 
fundamental about caring for people that requires a human to do it?
The role and goals of medicine
Predictions about the future implications of technology are notori -
ously difficult to make and prone to embarrassingly high degrees 
of error.
It is right for doctors to welcome rigorously tested narrow 
AI as it is currently available, and to appraise future developments 
critically to ensure that they maintain the safety and dignity of the 
patients they are designed to help.
However, technology can never replace the human- to- human 
interaction at the heart of every medical consultation.
While we 
strive to use all available technology to refine diagnosis and improve 
management, this must never be at the expense of the relation -
ship that has always formed the cornerstone of effective medical 
care.
We are increasingly able to provide our patients with the most 
incredible therapeutic interventions that deliver invaluable improve-
ments in quality and quantity of life.
But we are also always able to 
give them our attention, comfort, compassion and care.
There can 
be no greater privilege than having a patient trust you with their life 
and health, and we shoulder a heavy responsibility when seeking to 
act as their doctors.
Further reading
Academy of Medicine Royal Colleges. Artificial Intelligence in Healthcare, 2018; 
https://www.aomrc.org.uk/wp- content/uploads/2019/01/Artificial_intelligence_in_
healthcare_0119.pdf.
Nuffield Council on Bioethics.
Artificial Intelligence (AI) in Healthcare and Research , 
2018; http://nuffieldbioethics.org/wp- content/uploads/Artificial- Intelligence- AI- in- 
healthcare- and- research.pdf.