69
4
Evidence- based practice
Rosalind Raine and Helen Barratt
EBP
Introduction 69
A framework for applying evidence to clini cal  
problems  70
Asking answerable questions 70
Searching for the evidence 70
How to conduct a search  71
Appraising the evidence 71
The hierarchy of evidence  71
Critical appraisal  74
Applying the evidence 78
Challenges of implementing evidence  78
Improving the uptake of evidence  79
CORE SKILLS AND KNOWLEDGE
Estimates from various countries suggest that up to 40% of 
patients do not receive evidence- based healthcare. For example, 
despite the evidence for the effectiveness of prompt corticoster-
oids for Bell’s palsy, almost half of patients (44%) do not  
receive this treatment, and provision is even lower for patients 
over the age of 60. Furthermore, 20% or more of healthcare 
is unnecessary or potentially harmful. For example, antibiotics 
for acute respiratory tract infection continue to be widely pre -
scribed, despite being ineffective.  
Evidence- based practice offers a framework to assist clini -
cians in making efficient and appropriate use of the available 
literature and taking informed decisions about its application. All 
doctors need to develop key skills in applying this framework to 
clinical scenarios, including:
	 •		converting	real-	life	clinical	and	population	health	problems	
into answerable questions
	 •		locating	the	best	available	evidence
	 •		appraising	the	evidence	critically
	 •		applying	the	evidence	in	practice.
Opportunities for developing skills in evidence- based medi-
cine include attending (or setting up) a journal club where 
research papers are critically appraised, following the PICO 
approach – described later in this chapter – to apply evidence to 
particular dilemmas presenting in patients seen in clinical prac -
tice, visiting a local public health team to see how evidence is 
applied at a population level, or helping to write a local clinical 
guideline where evidence is applied at an institutional level.
 INTRODUCTION
The evidence- based medicine movement emerged over 30 years ago 
and is widely accepted as the gold standard for medical decision- 
making. It was defined in 1996 as ‘the conscientious, explicit, and 
judicious use of current best evidence in making decisions about 
the care of individual patients’, with evidence in this case referring 
to peer- reviewed research literature. The focus has since expanded 
to include an emphasis on the importance of the patient and carer 
perspective in decision- making, alongside research evidence. We 
therefore refer in this chapter to evidence- based practice (EBP), 
which we define as ‘ an approach to decision- making in which 
the clinician uses the best scientific evidence available, in con-
sultation with the patient, to decide upon the option that suits 
the patient best’. This chapter will also embrace evidence- based 
public health practice, which applies evidence to wider populations, 
as well as individual patients.
The need for EBP
A number of factors have driven the rapid expansion of EBP . These 
include a growing awareness among health professionals of the 
gap between the large amount of good- quality research evidence 
available in the published literature and its often limited use in clini-
cal practice. For example, thrombolysis using tissue plasminogen 
activator (tPA) is an evidence- based treatment that is effective in 
acute stroke. However, despite the potential benefits offered by 
thrombolysis, achieving and sustaining high rates of tPA delivery 
to eligible patients has proved problematic. EBP also has a role in 
ensuring that treatments offered by healthcare providers are of high 
value and accrue the most benefits for patients and the public – 
especially where escalating demands for care result in constrained 
resources. 
Barriers to EBP
A multitude of barriers exist that lead to research evidence not 
being taken up into clinical practice, or to its being implemented in 
a delayed or patchy manner.
Knowledge barriers and the use of clinical  
guidelines
The most obvious barrier is lack of knowledge. It is estimated that 
general physicians would need to read 20 articles a day, all year 
round, to keep abreast of emerging knowledge in their specialist 
field. As research evidence continues to expand, clinical guidelines 
have become an important mechanism for informing day- to- day 
practice and helping clinicians keep up to date. Clinical guide -
lines identify, evaluate and summarize the best available research 
evidence relating to the management of specific conditions. 
4
 70 Evidence- based practice
Consequently, they are a useful first port of call when seeking infor-
mation on which to base decision- making. Guidelines are usually 
produced at national or international level by medical associations 
or government bodies. In the UK, the National Institute for Health 
and Care Excellence (NICE) provides recommendations about care 
for patients with specific conditions. In the USA, the National Guide-
line Clearing House maintains a catalogue of guidelines published 
by various health and medical associations, including the Agency 
for Healthcare Research and Quality.
While clinical guidelines are not legally binding, doctors are 
expected to take them into account, and yet the extent to which 
this happens in practice varies. For example, UK clinical guidelines 
recommend that patients with high blood pressure and raised cho-
lesterol should receive antihypertensives, antiplatelet drugs and 
lipid- lowering drugs for the secondary prevention of ischaemic 
stroke. However, one study demonstrated that only 25.6% of men 
and 20.8% of women receive appropriate treatment, and the likeli -
hood of 80–89- year- olds receiving secondary prevention is nearly 
half that of 50–59- year- olds. 
Other factors limiting the implementation of EBP
These include:
	 •		doubts	about	the	accuracy	of	the	research	evidence	being	pro-
moted
	 •		national	and	local	political	values
	 •		priorities	and	pressures	from	industry,	patients,	the	public	and	
clinicians
	 •		cost.
These often interconnecting factors can lead to health poli -
cies being implemented despite the availability of contradictory 
evidence. For example, a programme of five- yearly preventative 
health checks for 40–74- year- olds is now mandatory across the 
National Health Service in England. It had been argued that the 
scheme would help prevent 1600 heart attacks yearly, saving at 
least 650 lives; prevent over 4000 people from developing dia-
betes; and detect at least 20 000 cases of diabetes or kidney dis -
ease earlier. However, the evidence suggests that general health 
checks:
	 •		do	not,	in	fact,	reduce	morbidity	or	mortality
	 •		increase	the	number	of	diagnoses	made,	with	consequent	costs	
to the health service.
For example, although health checks lead to more diagnoses 
and more medical treatment for hypertension, this does not improve 
mortality or morbidity. Consequently, this intervention could be 
considered inappropriate, as the potential harms outweigh the 
expected benefits. 
A framework for applying evidence to  
clinical problems
EBP offers a framework to assist clinicians in making efficient and 
appropriate use of the available literature and in reaching considered 
decisions about its application. The goal of this chapter is to pro -
mote ways in which evidence can be used wisely, with good under-
standing of its value and its limitations. In the following sections, we 
describe four essential steps:
	 •		converting	information	needs	into	answerable	questions
	 •		locating	the	best	available	evidence
	 •		appraising	the	evidence	critically
	 •		applying	the	evidence	in	practice.
Further reading
Krogsbøll LT, Jørgensen KJ, Grønhøj Larsen C et al. General health checks in 
adults for reducing morbidity and mortality from disease: Cochrane systematic 
review and meta- analysis. BMJ 2012; 345:e7191.
Muir Gray JA. Evidence- Based Healthcare: How to Make Health Policy and 
Management Decisions, 2nd edn. London: Churchill Livingstone; 2001.
Paul CL, Ryan A, Rose S et al . How can we improve stroke thrombolysis rates? 
A review of health system factors and approaches associated with thrombolysis 
administration rates in acute stroke care. Implement Sci 2016; 11:51.
Raine R, Wong W, Ambler G et al. Socio- demographic variations in the 
contribution of secondary drug prevention to stroke survival at middle and older 
ages: a cohort study. BMJ 2009; 338:b1279.
Sackett DL, Rosenberg WM, Gray JA et al.  Evidence based medicine: what it is 
and what it isn’t. BMJ 1996 13; 312:71–72. 
ASKING ANSWERABLE QUESTIONS
Every day, doctors make multiple decisions that involve asking 
implicit and explicit questions. Evidence- based care protocols, 
pathways and clinical guidelines are available that cover the man -
agement of a wide range of both common and rare conditions, and 
these should generally be a clinician’s first port of call.
Sometimes, however, a literature search is required – perhaps 
where a patient does not fit well into the categories dealt with by 
clinical guidelines, or where a condition is rare and not covered by 
good evidence- based summaries. The first step is to turn the infor-
mation need into a focused question. This must be directly relevant 
to the patient at hand and incorporate the key issues that need to be 
present in research articles to inform the decision- making process. 
Identification of these key issues will allow formulation of a focused 
literature search strategy.
The PICO approach  facilitates this process ( Box 4.1 ), where 
patient, intervention, comparison and outcome (PICO) are consid -
ered the four most key parts of a well- built clinical question. 
SEARCHING FOR THE EVIDENCE
The next step is to identify relevant research evidence that will pro-
vide an answer to the clinical question. There are two main sources 
of evidence available.
Primary sources of evidence
These are comprised of the thousands of original articles published 
every year in research journals. Research papers are catalogued 
in a variety of databases, which are searchable on the Internet. 
Patient or problem (P)
	 •		Who	is	the	relevant	patient?
	 •		What	is	the	condition	or	problem	of	interest?
	 •		What	are	the	most	important	characteristics	of	the	patient? 
Intervention (I)
	 •		What	is	the	management	strategy	of	interest	(e.g.	diagnostic	test,	treatment)? 
Comparison of interventions (C)
	 •		What	is	the	main	alternative	management	strategy	being	considered,	if	any? 
Outcome (O)
	 •		What	will	the	management	strategy	accomplish,	measure,	improve	or	affect?
	 •		What	are	the	patient-	relevant	consequences?
Box 4.1  Components of clinical questions structured using the PICO approach
4
Appraising the evidence 71
EBP
For many medical queries, Medline is the best- known database 
of health- related literature and makes a good starting place. The 
size and breadth of databases mean that a systematic searching 
approach is required to identify the best evidence available. 
Secondary sources of evidence
In order to deal with the growing volume of primary research, sec -
ondary sources of evidence are increasingly consulted. Secondary 
sources are summaries and analyses of evidence derived from and 
based on primary sources. The Cochrane Library (UK) was one of 
the first online collections of databases relevant to medicine and 
other healthcare specialties, and includes the Cochrane Database 
of Systematic Reviews. Other organizations producing systematic 
reviews and other evidence syntheses to inform practice and policy 
include the Joanna Briggs Institute and the Campbell Collaboration. 
How to conduct a search
Although biomedical databases vary in terms of their structure, 
the principles of using them are largely the same. Using the PICO 
approach to generate a clinical question is helpful, as the components 
can then be employed to select search terms for conducting a search 
in Medline. Text- word searching involves seeking specific words or 
phrases, usually in the title or abstract of an article. The first step is to 
break the clinical question down into its individual components. Box 
4.2 contains a worked example, using the PICO approach.
Practical tips for searching databases include:
	 •		Searching	only	for	articles	that	include	a	full	phrase,	rather	than	
individual words on their own, by putting double quotation 
marks around a group of words (e.g. “sore throat”).
	 •		Narrowing	the	search	and	reducing	the	number	of	citations	iden-
tified by using AND in the database search function.
	 •		Avoiding	narrowing	too	far.	Using	the	example	question	in	Box 
4.2, entering “sore throat” AND antibiotics in the search function 
will identify articles that contain both terms, whereas including 
“sore throat ” AND antibiotics AND “ symptom duration ”, theo -
retically yielding the highest concentration of relevant articles, 
may also miss others. Consequently, for routine clinical queries, 
using two terms in a search strategy is usually sufficient to focus 
the search.
	•	 	Engaging	the	help	of	expert	health	sciences	librarians.	This	may	be	
valuable in developing search strategies for more complex queries.
	 •		Remembering	 the	 dangers	 of	 publication	 bias.	 Studies	 with	
negative results may not have made it as far as publication. On 
the other hand, studies may be in progress that could inform 
decision- making. 
APPRAISING THE EVIDENCE
Once some potentially relevant research articles have been identi -
fied, the next step is to decide whether the studies described were 
undertaken in a way that makes their findings reliable and valid, 
and to consider the relevance of any articles to the clinical question 
identified. This process is known as critical appraisal.
The hierarchy of evidence
Ethically, patients should receive the best- evidenced treatment 
available, and the ‘hierarchy of evidence’ is a core principle of EBP 
that helps to ensure this. The hierarchy is formed by ranking study 
types based on the extent to which the reader can be confident 
that the results and estimates of a treatment effect are correct. 
In most hierarchies, meta- analyses and systematic reviews are at 
the top of the pyramid, followed by experimental and observational 
studies, with case reports or case series at the bottom ( Fig. 4.1). 
The hierarchy encourages a top- down approach to locating the best 
Charlie	is	a	20-	year-	old	student	who	has	attended	his	GP	practice	with	a	sore	
throat.	You	wonder	whether	antibiotics	might	help	improve	his	symptoms.
Answerable clinical question
Are antibiotics effective in reducing the duration of symptoms in patients 
with	upper	respiratory	tract	infections? 
PICO
Patient problem or population:	Patients	with	a	sore	throat
Intervention or exposure: Antibiotics
Comparison or control: None
Outcome measure: Duration of symptoms 
Search terms in evidence/database (e.g. Medline)
“sore throat” AND antibiotics – 1032 articles
“sore throat” AND antibiotics AND “symptom duration” – 6 articles 
Answer
Antibiotics shorten the duration of symptoms by about 16 hours overall 
(Spinks	A,	Glasziou	PP,	Del	Mar	CB.	Antibiotics	for	sore	throat.	Cochrane 
Database of Systematic Reviews	2013;	11.	Art.	No.:	CD000023.	https://d
oi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD000023.pub4.)
Box 4.2  Searching for evidence – worked example
6\VWHPDWLFUHYLHZV
PHWDDQDO\VHV
5DQGRPL]HG
FRQWUROOHGWULDOV
&RKRUWVWXGLHV
&DVH±FRQWUROVWXGLHV
&URVVVHFWLRQDOVWXGLHV
&DVHUHSRUWV
+LJKHU
+LJKHU/RZHU
/RZHU
5LVNRIELDV
6WUHQJWKRI
HYLGHQFHRI
HIIHFWLYHQHVV
Fig. 4.1 Hierarchy of evidence.
4
 72 Evidence- based practice
evidence, which involves first searching for evidence at the top (e.g. 
a recent meta- analysis), and if that is not available, moving down to 
the next level of evidence.
Whatever the study design, when reading papers it is important 
to remain vigilant for poorly conducted research, as this diminishes 
the confidence that can be placed in the results.
Systematic reviews and meta- analyses
Systematic reviews
These synthesize the results of all available studies in a particular 
area, identified via comprehensive, systematic literature searches. 
They therefore provide a summary of current evidence about a 
topic, including an analysis of study results, strengths and weak -
nesses. Systematic reviews also highlight remaining gaps in knowl-
edge or a lack of robust evidence. Data from all the included studies 
are combined to build up a broader picture of the evidence.
Systematic reviews aim to locate as much as possible of the 
research relevant to a particular research question. Explicit methods 
are then used to identify what can reliably be said about the topic, 
drawing on the findings of all the included studies. All study types 
can be included in a systematic review, including randomized con -
trolled trials (RCTs) and observational studies, which are described 
later. A well- conducted review will assign a quality score to included 
studies so that the conclusions provide an overview of the status 
of the research field. For example, where there is a lot of robust 
evidence available to answer a question, clear recommendations 
can be made about patient care, or – in contrast – where there is 
a limited amount of low- quality evidence available, reliable recom -
mendations cannot be made.
As systematic reviews draw together the findings of multiple 
studies, they lie at the top of the evidence hierarchy, though this 
position is not an absolute. For example, findings might quickly 
be superseded by evidence that is more recent. A large, well- 
conducted RCT may also provide more convincing evidence of 
effect than a systematic review of smaller RCTs. 
Meta- analyses
These represent an extension of a systematic review. Data from each 
of the included studies are combined statistically to give a single esti-
mate of effect. To conduct a meta- analysis, the included studies must 
address the same research question and make use of the same out-
come measure. It can be carried out only when the relevant numerical 
data are presented in enough detail in the individual research papers.
An estimate of effect is calculated using weighted averages of all 
the results. The weighting given to individual studies is based on their 
sample size, with larger studies contributing more to the final meta- 
analysis than smaller ones. As meta- analyses pool findings from all 
the included studies, and therefore draw on data from a larger num-
ber of patients, they provide a stronger and more accurate estimate 
of a treatment effect than individual studies on their own. 
Interventional studies
Randomized controlled trials (RCTs)
RCTs are generally considered to provide the most reliable evidence 
of whether an intervention is effective. A range of different types of 
intervention can be tested in an RCT, including therapeutic and pro-
phylactic agents (e.g. drugs, vaccines), surgical and medical proce-
dures, or health service and public health strategies.
Randomization
The strength of the RCT lies in the process of randomization, which 
is characteristic of this type of study design. Study participants are 
randomly assigned to one of two study groups: the experimental 
group who will receive the intervention being tested, and a compari-
son group (known as controls) who may receive:
	 •		a	conventional	treatment	(referred	to	as	usual	care)
	 •		no	intervention
	 •		a	placebo:	a	substance	that	resembles	the	intervention	in	all	res-
pects, except that it contains no active ingredients.
Every participant has an equal chance of being in the treatment 
group or the control group. The two groups are then followed up 
prospectively over time, to assess the effectiveness of the interven-
tion compared with the conventional or placebo treatment.
The goal of randomization is to ensure that the two study groups 
are as similar as possible in all respects, apart from the treatment 
or intervention. Any other factors that might also have an impact 
on the outcome, known as confounders, should be distributed 
equally and randomly between the two groups. Consequently, any 
observed differences between the study groups are more likely to 
be due to differences in the treatment alone.
Those responsible for recruiting participants into a study must 
not influence the process of randomization. A common method of 
achieving this is randomization by telephone, where the investigator 
calls a central randomization service to obtain information about 
which study arm the participant should be allocated to. 
Confounding factors
These are factors that could potentially influence both the expo -
sure and the outcome in a study, leading to inaccurate results. 
For example, when the relationship between alcohol consumption 
(the exposure) and coronary heart disease (CHD; the outcome) is 
under examination, smoking may be a confounding factor. Smok -
ing is correlated with alcohol consumption but is also associated 
with CHD, so may mask the true relationship between alcohol and 
CHD. Randomization is a way of trying to control for confounders, 
by ensuring that these factors are randomly (and, one hopes, fairly 
equally) divided between control and intervention groups. 
Blinding
When a participant has been randomized, the investigator may or 
may not be aware of which group the participant has been allocated 
to. If they know which treatment the participant is receiving, this 
might influence (intentionally or unintentionally) the way in which 
they measure or interpret the outcome data, introducing bias into 
the study. For example, they may interpret information more favour-
ably if it comes from participants who they know to be receiving the 
drug under investigation. Similarly, if a participant knows that they 
have been allocated to the placebo group, this may influence the 
way in which they participate in the trial. Therefore, blinding can be 
seen as a way to avoid potential bias.
	 •		In	a	double-	blind	study,	neither	the	patients	nor	the	investigators	
know the study group allocation.
	 •		In	a	single-	blind	study,	patients	do	not	know	their	study	group	
allocation.
Blinding also involves ensuring that, as far as possible, the inter-
vention and standard or placebo treatment both appear the same, 
although this may not be possible for non- drug interventions. For 
example, if the intervention involves physiotherapy exercises or a 
new way of delivering a service, it is often not feasible to conceal 
which group participants have been allocated to. 
Intention- to- treat analysis
During an RCT, participants may be lost to follow- up for a range 
of reasons. Individuals may be unable to continue participating, 
4
Appraising the evidence 73
EBP
or may stop taking their allocated treatment – perhaps because 
of adverse side- effects or because they felt it was not working. If 
these individuals are subsequently excluded from the analysis of 
the results, the effectiveness of the drug may be overestimated. In 
the real world, patients do not always take their medication as pre -
scribed, so RCT data are often examined using intention- to- treat 
analysis. The final results are analysed based on the treatment arm 
to which participants were initially allocated, and not on the treat -
ment they actually received. 
Limitations of RCTs
Although RCTs are considered to provide the most reliable evidence 
of effectiveness, by minimizing the possibility of bias, they are not 
without their limitations.
Patients to whom the results might subsequently be applied in 
real clinical practice may often be excluded from RCTs in order to 
minimize differences between experimental groups. For example, 
strict inclusion and exclusion criteria may mean that patients with 
co- morbidities are excluded, as this might affect their response to 
the intervention. However, many patients in the real world will have 
more than one condition. Patients recruited to trials are also more 
likely to be receiving care in teaching hospitals, where care may dif-
fer from that provided in district general hospitals. This reduces the 
external validity or generalizability of the trial, or the extent to which 
the findings can be applied in other settings.
Additionally, although RCTs are the gold standard for evaluating 
the effectiveness of interventions, randomization may not always 
be required. For example, an RCT may be unnecessary when the 
effect of an intervention is dramatic (e.g. vaccination for smallpox 
or penicillin for bacterial infections). In these cases, the likelihood of 
unknown confounding factors affecting the outcome is so small that 
they can be ignored.
An RCT may be unfeasible when the outcome of greatest inter -
est occurs rarely (e.g. death), and may be too costly if the outcome 
of greatest interest occurs far in the future (e.g. loosening of artifi -
cial hip joints). Observational methods, such as cohort studies, may 
be the only practical means of obtaining such information in these 
cases.
Finally, the use of RCTs raises several ethical issues. RCTs are 
based on the premise that there is sufficient doubt about the par -
ticular intervention being tested to justify not giving it to half of 
the participants. At the same time, there must be sufficient belief 
in its potential benefit to justify exposing the remaining half of the 
patients. This is known as clinical equipoise, and requires care -
ful consideration to be given to the intervention that is received by 
the control group. If an effective treatment already exists, partici -
pants in the control group should have this rather than a placebo, in 
order to make a transparent assessment of the novel intervention in 
comparison to usual care. Informed consent is required in all study 
designs but particularly so in RCTs. Participants need to understand 
that they are participating in an experiment and, consequently, may 
not receive the treatment under investigation. 
Observational studies
Cohort studies
Cohort studies follow a group of individuals over a period of time 
(often years) to examine whether they benefit from a healthcare or 
public health intervention, or develop a disease or other outcome 
of interest. A cohort is a group of individuals who have a common 
characteristic. Cohorts are selected on the basis that individuals 
share similar, relevant characteristics, such as receiving cancer 
screening or being exposed to cigarette smoking. For example, the 
British Doctors Study, which ran from 1951 to 2001, was a cohort 
made up of doctors, including both smokers and non- smokers. 
It provided convincing proof of the association between smoking 
and lung cancer, and led to a dramatic decline in smoking from the 
1970s onwards.
Cohort studies are a type of observational study, meaning that 
no adjustments are made to participants’ treatments or lifestyle. 
However, detailed information is collected about the interventions 
they receive, their sociodemographic characteristics, lifestyles and 
behaviours, and their outcomes, using questionnaires, interviews, 
physical examinations and investigations such as blood tests, and 
taking information from existing sources such as medical records. 
Cohort studies can therefore be prospective, involving the collec -
tion of new data, or retrospective, looking back in time and using 
existing data such as medical records. Retrospective studies are 
cheaper and faster to conduct because the data have already been 
collected and stored. However, because it was not collected for 
research purposes, information in patients’ medical records may be 
incomplete, inaccurate and inconsistently recorded.
Cohort studies can also vary significantly in terms of their size 
and complexity. At one extreme, a large population may be studied 
over decades. For example, the Millennium Cohort Study (MCS) fol-
lows the lives of around 19 000 young people born across England, 
Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland in 2000- 1. Families were first 
assessed when children were 9 months old and have been followed 
up at regular intervals. Interviews are carried out with the main par-
ent and the child, and a range of information is collected, includ -
ing employment and income; housing; family structure; ethnicity; 
parenting activities such as reading to the child; developmental 
indicators; and both parental and child mental health. At the other 
extreme, some cohort studies follow up relatively small groups for 
a few days or weeks.
Cohort studies are particularly valuable in situations where 
RCTs cannot be performed because randomization is either unethi-
cal or impractical. They also allow rare or long- term outcomes to 
be assessed: for example, in the UK, the National Joint Registry 
collects information on a nationwide cohort of patients who have 
undergone joint replacement operations. Implants that fail ear -
lier than expected can be identified and the information acted on. 
External validity (also referred to as generalizability) will be higher in 
large cohort studies such as this because a broad range of patients, 
from different settings, are included, without the restricted inclusion 
criteria required in an RCT.
A limitation of the cohort method is losses to follow- up. Cohort 
members may decline to continue participation in the study or fail 
to maintain contact. Such events may (or may not) be related to the 
exposure, the outcome or both. For example, a study looking at the 
effect of high- impact exercise on risk factors for osteoporosis had 
greater loss to follow- up in the group assigned to exercise. Women 
who dropped out may have had inherently lower bone strength that 
made the exercise less tolerable for them. If so, this would have pro-
duced selective loss of women more likely to develop osteoporosis 
from the active treatment group, and this would cause a biased esti-
mate: specifically, an overestimate of the benefit of exercise. 
Case–control studies
In a case–control study, patients who have received a healthcare 
intervention or developed a disease are identified. Their past history 
is then compared with that of individuals – or controls – who did 
not receive the intervention or do not have the disease. For exam -
ple, participants with a disease of interest (e.g. lung cancer) may 
be tracked back in time, sometimes for many years, to determine 
4
 74 Evidence- based practice
whether they were exposed to a risk factor of interest (e.g. second-
hand tobacco smoke). In another example, a study used primary 
healthcare records to look at service use in the previous year, in 
order to identify factors associated with frequent attendance at hos-
pital emergency departments.
Researchers try to ensure that the cases and controls are as 
similar as possible with respect to other factors. This can be done 
either on an individual basis (e.g. by pairing each case with a con -
trol of the same age and sex) or in groups (e.g. choosing a control 
group with an overall age and sex distribution similar to that of the 
cases). Unknown differences may still exist between the cases and 
controls, however, which could influence the results.
A particular limitation of case–control studies is the risk of recall 
bias. Case participants are usually keen to find out what caused their 
illness, or may ascribe their positive and adverse outcomes to an 
intervention. As a result, they may be better motivated to remember 
details of their past than controls with no special interest in the study 
question. Assessing the exposure of controls may therefore be chal-
lenging, especially if this relies only on their personal recall. This risk 
can be lessened by using data from electronic medical records.
Case–control studies are another form of observational study 
because no intervention takes place. Since the assessment is retro-
spective and the risk of recall bias is high, case–control studies lie 
towards the bottom of the EBP hierarchy. However, they can pro -
vide interesting insights. For example, case–control studies start 
with people who are known to have a disease of interest, rather 
than looking at a population free of disease and waiting to see who 
develops it. This approach therefore lends itself to studying groups 
of patients with rare conditions. For example, in 1955, Richard Doll 
published a case–control study demonstrating a significant excess 
of the rare lung cancer mesothelioma among asbestos workers. 
This study was the first to identify asbestos as one of the world’s 
most dangerous industrial carcinogens. 
Cross- sectional surveys
These observational studies provide a snapshot of a particular 
group of patients or people at a single point in time, and can be 
used to assess the prevalence of illness or a risk factor, or the range 
of perceived symptoms in a given population. Examples include the 
proportion of patients with bladder cancer who smoke, or patient- 
reported outcomes on discharge from hospital.
As cross- sectional data describe only what is happening at a 
single moment in time, they cannot be used to answer questions 
about the causes of disease or the impact of treatment. They also 
do not provide information about changes over time, unless they are 
repeated. Consequently, they are ranked low in the EBP hierarchy 
of evidence.
Nevertheless, cross- sectional surveys can provide key informa-
tion: for example, in planning services and ensuring that they are 
equipped to meet the needs of the local population. They may also 
be used to draw inferences about possible relationships between 
factors or outcomes, or to gather preliminary data to support further 
research and experimentation. 
Case series or case reports
These describe a group of patients or a single individual with an 
outcome of interest, or novel and unusual features. Due to their 
descriptive nature, they provide little evidence about causality. 
Their small size and lack of representativeness also mean that they 
cannot be assumed to have relevance for the wider population of 
patients with the same condition. Therefore, they are regarded as 
the weakest form of evidence in the EBP hierarchy.
Nevertheless, they can still provide useful information, particularly 
in the very early stages of research into a disease area. For exam -
ple, in 1985, the Centers for Disease Control in the USA published 
a report describing five cases of Pneumocystis pneumonia in pre -
viously healthy, gay men in Los Angeles. This was the first official 
reporting of what became known as the AIDS epidemic. However, 
case reports can also be misused: for example, the now discredited 
case series published in The Lancet in 1998, which posited a link 
between the measles, mumps and rubella vaccine, colitis and autism. 
Problems with the ‘hierarchy of evidence’
Although the evidence hierarchy has become widely accepted, con-
cerns have been raised about ranking evidence in this way. As has 
been outlined, study designs traditionally ranked lower down the hier-
archy may be more appropriate if, for example, outcomes of interest 
are rare or occur far into the future. Observational studies also pro-
duce results with higher external validity because inclusion and exclu-
sion criteria are usually less restrictive. Additional concerns, including 
the extent to which the findings of RCTs can be applied to patients in 
other settings, are explored in the final section of this chapter.
The hierarchy focuses only on research addressing the question 
of the effectiveness of interventions. Other questions are equally 
salient, however, such as:
	 •		prognosis	(what	is	likely	to	happen?)
	 •		harm	(is	this	substance	likely	to	have	adverse	effects?)
	 •		experience	(what	is	it	like	to	receive	this	intervention?)
	 •		implications	for	services	(staff	workload,	the	need	for	additional	
monitoring and so on).
Different types of question require different study designs  
(Box 4.3):
	 •		Determining	the	number	of	patients	living	with	a	condition	at	
a given point in time (a prevalence question ) may be best 
achieved using a cross- sectional survey. However, because it 
provides only a snapshot of that single time point, it cannot ex -
plain the likely duration between diagnosis and death.
	 •		The	design	needed	for	a	prognosis question is a cohort study – 
a study that follows up recently diagnosed patients and records 
what happens to them.
	 •		To	answer	experience questions (what it is like to live with a 
particular condition, or whether a certain intervention is accept -
able to patients), qualitative approaches, such as interviews or 
focus groups, are often also needed. 
Combined approaches
Although there are big differences between the underlying assump-
tions of quantitative and qualitative research, the most compre -
hensive, generalizable and useful research is that which brings the 
two approaches together. For example, qualitative approaches can 
helpfully be used within an RCT to explore how an intervention was 
implemented and what was actually delivered, compared with what 
was intended. This is known as a process evaluation, as it docu -
ments the process that took place. Process evaluation can explain 
discrepancies between expected and observed outcomes, help us 
to understand how local context influences outcomes, and provide 
insights to aid implementation in other settings. 
Critical appraisal
Critical appraisal aims to:
	 •		identify	 the	 methodological	 strengths	 and	 weaknesses	 of	 a	
piece of research
4
Appraising the evidence 75
EBP
	 •		assess	whether	the	researchers	used	the	right	design	for	their	
study
	 •		make	informed	decisions	about	the	quality	of	the	evidence	being	
appraised
	 •		establish	how	useful	the	piece	of	research	is	for	wider	decision-	
making.
A range of tools and checklists exist to help assess the quality 
of each design (see ‘Further reading’). However, these checklists 
should merely supplement the level of careful thought and judge -
ment required whenever reading a paper. Regardless of the study 
type, critical appraisal involves some overarching questions ( Box 
4.4); the three main steps involved are described below.
Question 1: Are the results of the study valid?
Validity refers to the soundness or methodological rigour of a study. 
A study is considered valid if the way it has been designed and 
carried out means that the results provide a trustworthy estimate 
of clinical effectiveness. A study that is sufficiently free from bias 
has internal validity.
Bias is a consistently occurring error in a study that results in 
an incorrect estimate of the association between an exposure and 
an outcome. For example, in a case–control study, recall bias may 
occur because a patient with an outcome of interest (e.g. lung 
cancer) may report their exposure experience (e.g. smoking) differ -
ently to a control without the outcome. This would then lead to an 
incorrect assessment of the relationship between smoking and lung 
cancer.
No study is perfect and free from all bias. A systematic check 
should be carried out to ensure that the researchers have done all 
they can to minimize it. Different study designs are prone to different 
types of bias but observational studies (and especially case– control 
studies) are particularly susceptible. More than 50 types of research 
bias have been identified but, for simplicity, they can be broadly 
grouped into two categories:
	• 		Information bias. This results from systematic differences in the 
way in which data are collected from the various study groups, 
including data relating to either the exposure (i.e. factors that 
may be associated with an outcome of interest, such as weight) 
or the outcome (e.g. type 2 diabetes). For example, has partici -
pants’ weight been recently recorded or does the study rely on 
information collected at the time they registered in primary care? 
In this case, information might be systematically more accu -
rate for patients with diabetes than for patients without weight- 
related conditions, leading to an incorrect estimate of the asso -
ciation between exposure and outcome.
	• 		Selection bias. This occurs when there is a systematic differ -
ence between either:
	 •	 	those	who	participate	in	the	study	and	those	who	do	not	or
	 •	 	those	in	the	treatment	arm	of	a	study	and	those	in	the	control	
group.
Randomized controlled trials (RCTs)
	• 		Randomization aims to ensure that the study groups are as similar as 
possible,	apart	from	whether	or	not	they	receive	the	treatment	being	studied.	
Consequently,	observed	differences	are	more	likely	to	be	due	to	differences	
in	the	treatment	alone.
	• 		Blinding ensures that there are no differences in the way participants in 
each	study	arm	are	managed	or	their	progress	and	outcome	is	measured.	In	
a	double-	blind	study,	neither	patients	nor	investigators	know	the	study	arm	to	
which	the	participant	has	been	allocated.
	 •		In	an	intention- to- treat analysis,	RCT	findings	are	analysed	based	on	the	
treatment	arm	to	which	participants	were	initially	allocated,	regardless	of	
whether	they	dropped	out	of	the	study.
	 •		Ensuring	that	RCT	participants	are	as	similar	as	possible	enhances	the	
internal validity	of	the	results	(i.e.	their	accuracy	in	the	study	context)	but	
may reduce their external validity	(i.e.	their	generalizability	to	the	diverse	
range	of	patients	with	the	condition	under	study).
	 •		RCTs	are	a	form	of	experimental study. The researcher manipulates 
exposure	to	the	intervention	(e.g.	a	new	drug	treatment)	by	allocating	
participants	to	the	intervention	or	control	group. 
Observational studies
	 •		In	an	observational study,	the	researcher	measures	exposures	(e.g.	new	
surgical	procedures)	that	the	participants	are	already	receiving.	Outcomes	
(e.g.	postoperative	complications)	are	then	observed	as	they	occur.
	 •		In	a	cohort study,	a	group	of	participants	(the	cohort)	is	followed	over	time.	
Researchers	observe	which	individuals	develop	outcomes	of	interest	(e.g.	
breast	cancer),	and	collect	information	about	factors	that	might	be	relevant	
to	the	development	of	the	outcome	(e.g.	smoking,	alcohol	consumption).	
Cohort	studies	can	provide	valuable	evidence	when	conducting	an	RCT	is	
unfeasible.	The	findings	may	have	greater	generalizability	because	inclusion	
and	exclusion	criteria	are	usually	less	restrictive.
	 •		In	a	case–control study,	patients	who	have	an	outcome	of	interest	are	
identified	(i.e.	cases).	Their	past	history	is	then	compared	with	that	of	
individuals	–	or	controls	–	who	do	not.	Cases	and	controls	should	be	as	
similar	as	possible	with	respect	to	other	factors.	A	particular	limitation	of	
case–control studies is the risk of recall bias because cases may be better 
motivated	to	remember	details	of	their	past	than	controls.
Box 4.3  Key messages about study design
Why was the study done?
	 •		A	clearly	focused	question	should	address	population,	intervention	and	
outcomes. 
What type of study was done?
	 •		The	study	design	must	match	the	question	asked. 
What are the study characteristics?
	 •		Use	the	PICO	question	format	to	help	answer	this	question. 
Are the results of the study valid?
	 •		Was	the	assignment	of	patients	to	treatments	in	a	controlled	trial	
(RCT)	randomized?	If	another	design	was	used,	how	were	participants	
allocated?
	 •		Were	patients,	health	workers	and	study	personnel	‘blind’	to	treatment	
allocation?
	 •		Were	all	the	patients	who	entered	the	study	properly	accounted	for	at	its	
conclusion?	Look	for	follow-	up	tables	and	whether	patients	in	an	RCT	
were	analysed	in	the	groups	to	which	they	were	randomized.
	 •		Were	the	groups	similar	at	the	start	of	the	study?
	 •		Aside	from	the	experimental	intervention,	were	the	groups	treated	
equally? 
What were the results?
	 •		How	large	was	the	treatment	effect?	How	precise	was	the	estimate	of	
the	treatment	effect?
	 •		Look	for	confidence	limits	and	p-	values. 
Will the results help?
	 •		Can	these	results	be	applied	locally?	Are	these	findings	applicable	to	
other	patients?
	 •		Were	all	relevant	outcomes	considered,	including	those	relevant	to	
patients?
	 •		Are	the	benefits	worth	the	harms	and	costs?
Box 4.4  Key questions in critical appraisal
4
 76 Evidence- based practice
Patients and clinicians who have strong treatment preferences 
are often excluded from RCTs. While these steps increase the inter-
nal validity of an RCT, they often lead to selection bias and an over-
estimation of the benefits of treatment, especially for patient- centred 
outcomes. For example, some women with early breast cancer have 
a strong preference for less invasive lumpectomy, whereas others 
prefer the reassurance of knowing that all potentially cancerous tis-
sue has been removed by a mastectomy. In one series of RCTs, only 
women without a strong preference for a particular treatment were 
recruited. However, as few as 10% subsequently agreed to have 
their treatment chosen at random, significantly reducing the extent 
to which the findings could be generalized to the wider population.
Similarly, telehealth interventions are becoming a prominent 
part of healthcare delivery, with examples including online cogni -
tive behavioural therapy or home monitoring of health parameters 
such as blood pressure. There is some evidence of their effective -
ness from RCTs. However, in several trials a large number of eligible 
individuals (over 75% in some cases) have declined to take parti. 
As well as compromising external validity, this may also indicate 
problems with the acceptability of the intervention, which may have 
a negative impact on uptake if it is later introduced into routine prac-
tice. In the case of telehealth, issues might include physical barriers 
in terms of accessing technology, as well as psychological barriers 
such as low confidence in using it. 
Question 2: What are the results?
The second step of critical appraisal is to consider the results. A 
range of statistical methods are available to help determine whether 
an intervention is effective. Results are presented in many different 
ways but are typically expressed in terms of likely harms or benefits. 
In RCTs, cohort studies and case–control studies, two groups are 
compared and the results are often expressed as ratios. These are 
calculated by dividing the outcome in the intervention group by the 
outcome in the control group.
	 •		If	the	outcome	is	measured	as	the	likelihood or odds of an event 
occurring in a group (those with the event/those without the 
event), then this comparison is known as the odds ratio (OR).
	 •		If	the	outcome	is	the	frequency with which an event occurs in 
a group (those with the event/the total number in that group), 
then this is known as the relative risk or risk ratio (RR). A worked 
example is provided in Box 4.5.
When there is no difference between the groups, the OR and the 
RR are 1. A ratio of more than 1 means that the outcome occurred 
more frequently in the intervention group, compared with the control 
group. If this is a desired outcome, such as stopping smoking or 
using a new medicine, then the intervention worked. If the outcome 
is not desired – for example, death – then the control group per -
formed better. Similarly, if the ratio is less than 1, then the outcome 
occurred less frequently in the intervention group.
Results may be more helpful when they are presented as abso -
lute, rather than relative, numbers. For example, a relative risk 
reduction as large as 50% is likely to influence decision- making. 
However, decision- makers also need to understand whether this 
represents an absolute difference in risk of, say 0.1-0.2%, rather 
than 10-20%. To express a result in terms of absolute numbers, the 
proportion of events in the control group is subtracted from that in 
the intervention group. The risk difference can also be presented as 
the number needed to treat (NNT, Box 4.6).
Confidence intervals and p- values
The results of many tests that examine the relationship between 
an intervention and an outcome are expressed using confidence 
intervals and p- values (Box 4.7). There will always be some uncer -
tainty about the true result because trials provide us with only a 
sample of possible results. However, the confidence interval (CI) 
gives the range of where the ‘true’ value in the population can be 
found. CIs are usually expressed for a given degree of certainty, 
usually 95%. This means that we can be 95% confident that the true 
value lies within those limits.
In contrast, p- values report the probability of seeing a result, 
such as the one obtained, if, in fact, the intervention had no real 
effect. In other words, how likely is the result to have occurred by 
chance? p- values can range from 0 (absolutely impossible) to 1 
(absolutely certain). A p- value of less than 0.05 means that a result, 
such as the one seen, would occur by chance on less than 1 in 20 
occasions. In this circumstance, a result is described as statistically 
significant. However, judgement should be applied to the p- value 
because a statistically significant result may not be clinically signifi-
cant, if, for example, the effect size is too small to make a meaning-
ful difference to patients.
CIs are more informative than p- values because they provide a 
range of values that are likely to include the true effect. Statistical 
non- significance may occur because the study sample size was too 
small. This is often indicated by very wide CIs. A bigger sample will 
result in small CIs and hence a more precise estimate of the effect of 
the intervention. As we have seen, however, statistical significance 
does not necessarily equal clinical significance. The best- quality 
studies first define and then examine evidence of an effect that is 
meaningful to patients and their clinicians. 
Question 3: Will the results help?
The final step of critical appraisal is considering whether the study is 
applicable to the decision being made for a particular patient. There 
are three issues to consider here.
First, are there any important differences between the par -
ticipants in the study and the patient in question? These must be 
identified, as they could have an impact on the effectiveness of an 
intervention. Check the study inclusion and exclusion criteria, which 
are usually reported in the methods section. Would the patient in 
your care have been eligible for inclusion in the study? Identify any 
characteristics that the patient has that were not considered in the 
study.
Second, many interventions and processes used in everyday 
clinical practice have both benefits and adverse consequences , 
and these should be weighed against each other. For example, 
breast cancer screening programmes in the UK currently invite 
women aged 50–70 years to undergo mammography every 3 
years. Breast screening helps identify breast cancer early. The 
earlier the condition is found, the better the chances of surviv -
ing it, and the less likely patients are to need a mastectomy or 
adjuvant therapy (chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy). However, 
for each woman with breast cancer whose death is prevented by 
screening, three women will be over- diagnosed. Over- diagnosis 
refers to the detection of cancers through screening that would not 
have become clinically apparent in the woman’s lifetime. Although 
their cancer would not have caused their death, these women will 
undergo treatment, such as surgery, which may result in side-  
effects and complications, as well as psychological, social and 
financial consequences. Of the 307 000 UK women aged 50–52 
years who are invited to begin screening every year, just over 1% 
will be over- diagnosed with cancer in the next 20 years. This risk 
of unnecessary treatment, and the potential associated harms, 
means that the appropriateness of breast cancer screening is hotly 
debated.
4
Appraising the evidence 77
EBP
Finally, cost- effectiveness is commonly not reported in 
the analysis of clinical trials. If a treatment is effective but pro -
vides only a small benefit and is very expensive, it may not be a 
good use of resources. Equally, even if a treatment is shown to 
be cost- effective, it may not be affordable. In the UK, NICE uses 
the cost per quality- adjusted life- year (QALY) to judge the cost-  
effectiveness of new technologies. This is the estimated cost of 
each additional year of life gained by a treatment or procedure, 
measured not just in terms of extra months or years of life, but 
in terms of the quality of that life. This is defined, for example, as 
freedom from or reduction in pain, or the ability to carry out the 
basic activities of daily living. Currently, NICE uses a threshold of 
£20 000–£30 000 per QALY . Treatments that come in at or below 
the threshold are usually approved. Those that come in above tend 
not to be judged cost- effective and so are not recommended for 
adoption by the NHS. Again, however, affordability to the health -
care system is not taken into account by this approach. For exam -
ple, a treatment may result in significant quality of life gains, but 
be very expensive and applicable only to a small subset of patients 
with a particular condition.
A	randomized	controlled	trial	was	conducted	to	examine	the	benefits	of	
prescribing the antiplatelet agent clopidogrel in addition to aspirin in patients 
with	an	ST-	elevation	myocardial	infarction	(MI).	A	total	of	45	852	patients	
admitted	to	hospital	within	24	h	of	suspected	acute	MI	onset	were	randomly	
allocated	to	a	group	receiving	clopidogrel	75	mg	daily	(n	=	22	961)	or	a	group	
receiving	a	matching	placebo	(n	=	22	891).	Both	groups	also	received	aspirin	
162	mg	daily.	Treatment	was	continued	until	discharge	or	up	to	4	weeks	in	
hospital	(mean	15	days	in	survivors).	One	of	the	pre-	specified	primary	outcome	
measures	was	death	from	any	cause	during	the	scheduled	treatment	period.	
Some	1726	(7.5%)	of	the	participants	in	the	clopidogrel	group	died	during	the	
treatment	period,	compared	with	1845	(8.1%)	in	the	placebo	arm.	OR	=	0.93	
(95%	CI	0.87–0.99,	p	=	0.03	(COMMIT	Collaborative	Group.	Addition	of	
clopidogrel	to	aspirin	in	45,852	patients	with	acute	myocardial	infarction:	
randomised	placebo-	controlled	trial.	Lancet	2005;	366:1607–1621).
The	findings	of	the	trial	can	be	summarized	in	a	2	×	2	table.
Event
Death from any 
cause
No event
No death/alive
Total
Intervention arm
Clopidogrel group
DI
1726
AI
21 235
NI
22 961
Control arm
Placebo group
DC
1845
AC
21 046
NC
22 891
DI,	DC,	AI and Ac	are	the	numbers	of	participants	with	each	outcome	(‘D’	or	‘A’)	
in	each	group	(‘I’	or	‘C’).	Text	in	italics	refers	to	the	study	described	earlier.
Odds ratios (OR)
An	odds	ratio	is	a	relative	measure	of	effect,	which	allows	comparison	of	the	
intervention	group	of	a	study	to	the	comparison	or	placebo	group.
The	trial	compared	participants	who	had	received	clopidogrel	(intervention	
arm)	with	participants	who	had	received	a	placebo	(control	arm).	The	outcome	–	or	
event	–	of	interest	was	mortality	from	any	cause,	and	the	findings	were	as	follows:
Odds	of	all-	cause	mortality	in	clopidogrel	group	(intervention	arm):
=	Number	of	participants	with	an	event/Number	of	participants	with	no	event
=	Number	of	participants	who	died/Number	of	participants	who	remained	alive
=	DI/AI
=	1726/21	235	=	0.0812	(4	decimal	places)
Odds	of	all-	cause	mortality	for	placebo	group	(control	arm):
=	Number	of	participants	with	an	event/Number	of	participants	with	no	event
=	Number	of	participants	who	died/Number	of	participants	who	remained	alive
=	DC/AC
=	1845/21	046	=	0.0877	(4	decimal	places)
Odds	ratio:
=	Odds	of	event	in	intervention	arm/Odds	of	event	in	control	arm
=	(DI/AI)/(DC/AC)
=	0.0813/0.0877	=	0.93
An	odds	ratio	of	0.93	means	that	the	odds	of	death	in	the	clopidogrel	group	
(intervention	arm)	are	7%	less	than	in	the	placebo	group	(control	arm).
Here,	the	OR	is	<1,	so	the	intervention	is	better	than	the	control.
If	the	OR	were	>1,	the	control	would	be	better	than	the	intervention.
If	the	OR	were	=	1,	there	would	be	no	difference	between	the	two	study	
groups,	as	the	outcome	is	the	same	in	both. 
Relative risk (RR)
Risk	of	event	in	clopidogrel	group	(intervention	arm):
=	Number	of	participants	with	an	event/Total	number	of	participants
=	DI/NI
=	1726/	22	961
=	0.0752	(4	decimal	places)
Risk	of	event	in	placebo	group	(control	arm):
=	Number	of	participants	with	an	event/Total	number	of	participants
=	DC/NC
=	1845/22	891
=	0.0806	(4	decimal	places)
Risk	ratio:
=	Risk	of	event	in	intervention	group/Risk	of	event	in	control	arm
=	(DI/NI)/(DC/NC)
=	0.0752/0.0806	=	0.93
A	risk	ratio,	also	known	as	the	relative	risk,	of	0.93	means	that	the	risk	of	death	
in	the	clopidogrel	group	(intervention	arm)	is	7%	less	than	in	the	placebo	group	
(control	arm).	The	RR	is	<1,	so	again	the	intervention	is	better	than	the	control.
If	an	outcome	is	relatively	rare	(e.g.	death	in	this	study),	then	the	odds	ratio	
will	be	very	similar	to	the	risk	ratio. 
Confidence intervals (CI)
The	confidence	interval	indicates	the	level	of	uncertainty	around	a	measure	
of	effect	(i.e.	the	precision	of	the	effect	estimate),	which	in	this	study	was	
expressed	as	an	odds	ratio.	Confidence	intervals	are	used	because	a	study	
recruits	only	a	small	sample	of	the	overall	population.	By	interpreting	upper	and	
lower	confidence	limits,	we	can	infer	that	the	true	population	effect	lies	between	
these	two	points.	Most	studies	report	the	95%	confidence	interval	(95%	CI).
If	the	confidence	interval	crosses	1	(e.g.	95%	CI	0.9–1.1),	this	implies	that	
there	is	no	difference	between	the	two	arms	of	the	study.	If	it	does	not	(e.g.	
95%	CI	0.7–0.8),	then	a	difference	exists.
In	the	trial	comparing	clopidogrel	to	placebo,	OR	=	0.93	(95%	CI	0.87–
0.99).	This	can	be	interpreted	as	follows:	the	odds	of	death	in	the	clopidogrel	
arm	are	7%	less	than	in	the	placebo	arm,	and	we	can	be	95%	confident	that	
the	true	population	effect	lies	between	13%	and	1%. 
p- values
The	p-	value	in	this	study	is	0.03.	This	means	that	if	clopidogrel	actually	had	no	
effect,	compared	to	the	placebo,	there	is	a	3%	of	chance	that	the	study	result	
(i.e.	the	observed	difference)	occurred	by	chance.
A	p-	value	of	<0.05	indicates	that	there	is	a	statistically	significant	
difference	between	groups.	A	p-	value	of	>0.05	indicates	that	the	difference	is	
not	statistically	significant. 
Conclusion
The	trial	comparing	clopidogrel	to	placebo	stated	OR	=	0.93	(95%	CI	
0.87–0.99,	p	=	0.03).	This	means	that	the	odds	of	death	in	the	clopidogrel	arm	
are	7%	less	than	in	the	placebo	arm,	and	we	can	be	95%	confident	that	the	
true	population	effect	lies	between	13%	and	1%.	This	result	was	statistically	
significant	(https://ebm.bmj.com/content/ebmed/11/3/82.full.pdf).
Box 4.5  Interpreting odds ratios, relative risk, confidence intervals and p- values – worked example
4
 78 Evidence- based practice
Further reading
Black N. Why we need observational studies to evaluate the effectiveness of 
health care. BMJ 1996; 312:1215–1218.
Greenhalgh T. How to Read a Paper: The Basics of Evidence- Based Medicine. 
London: Wiley–Blackwell; 2014.
Petrie A, Sabin C. Medical Statistics at a Glance. London: Wiley–Blackwell; 2009.
Straus SE, Glasziou P , Richardson WS et al. Evidence- Based Medicine. 
Edinburgh: Elsevier/Churchill Livingstone; 2018.
http://www.casp- uk.net/casp- tools- checklists Critical Appraisal Skills Programme 
(CASP) checklists. 
APPLYING THE EVIDENCE
The medical literature is continuously expanding, with new infor -
mation published every day that could help to improve care for 
patients and population health. However, there are often major 
challenges involved in implementing the findings of research in 
clinical practice, with some estimates suggesting that the pro -
cess takes an average of 17 years. The gap leads not only to the 
under- use of effective interventions, but also to the incorrect use 
of others, as well as the over- use of unhelpful or unproven inter -
ventions. All of this means negative outcomes for patients and for 
population health. It is also a waste of health service resources 
and of costly and time- consuming research. Consequently, con -
siderable effort has been put into improving the routine use of 
research findings.
Challenges of implementing evidence
Trial design
RCTs are designed to minimize the possibility of bias in the 
results, so that any observed variation can be interpreted as a 
causal relationship. They may achieve this internal validity at the 
expense of external validity or generalizability. There are three 
reasons why RCTs in many areas of healthcare may have low 
external validity:
	• 		The provider. The healthcare professionals who participate may 
be unrepresentative. They may have a particular interest in the 
topic or be enthusiasts and innovators.
	• 		The setting. This also may be atypical: a teaching hospital, for 
example.
	• 		The patients. All trials exclude certain categories of patients: for 
example, older patients or those with more than one illness. Of-
ten the exclusion criteria are so restrictive that the patients who 
are eligible for inclusion represent only a small proportion of the 
patients being treated in normal practice.
The outcome of drug treatment is likely to be unaffected by the 
characteristics of the prescribing doctor or the setting in which it is 
administered. On the other hand, the outcome of activities such as 
surgery and physiotherapy may be highly dependent on the char -
acteristics of the provider, setting and patients. As a result, RCTs 
generally offer an indication of the efficacy of an intervention, rather 
than its actual effectiveness in everyday practice. For successful 
implementation, however, both external validity and effectiveness 
are required if the findings are to be generalized to different patients 
and different settings.
Pragmatic RCTs
In a conventional RCT, the principal aim is to establish whether a 
treatment works. As outlined, because of the emphasis placed on 
internal validity, these ‘explanatory’ RCTs generally provide evi -
dence of efficacy, or what can be achieved in ideal circumstances.
However, the ultimate goal is to improve the health of real people 
in real settings, so it is crucial also to know whether an intervention 
is going to be effective in the real world. In contrast to explanatory 
trials, pragmatic RCTs place the emphasis on effectiveness rather 
than efficacy, and seek to measure the benefit that the treatment 
produces in routine clinical practice; they therefore provide better 
evidence for decision- making.
There are some key differences between explanatory and prag -
matic trials:
	 •		Explanatory	trials	recruit	as	homogeneous	a	population	as	pos-
sible. In contrast, the design of a pragmatic trial reflects varia -
tions between patients that occur in real clinical practice.
	 •		It	may	not	be	possible	to	blind	participants	and	investigators	to	
the treatment that is being given. Such biases are not necessar-
ily viewed as detrimental in a pragmatic trial.
	 •		In	pragmatic	trials,	outcome	measures	should	represent	the	full	
range of health gains relevant to patients and clinicians, e.g. 
both a reduction in mortality after stroke and an improvement in 
quality of life.
	 •		The	two	approaches	to	trial	design	will	sometimes	arrive	at	dif-
ferent conclusions about the benefit of a treatment because a 
treatment that works in an ideal setting may not work in real life. 
A study compared the incidence of dyskinesia after treatment with either 
ropinirole	(ROP)	or	levodopa	(LD)	in	patients	with	early	Parkinson’s	disease.a 
A total	of	17	of	179	patients	who	took	ROP	(treatment	group)	and	23	of	89	
who	took	LD	(control	group)	developed	dyskinesia.	The	risk	of	developing	
dyskinesia	among	patients	who	took	ROP	was	17/179	=	0.095,	whereas	the	
risk	of	developing	dyskinesia	among	patients	who	took	LD	was	23/89	=	0.258.
The relative risk	of	a	treatment	equals	the	risk	in	the	treated	group	
divided	by	the	risk	in	the	control	group	(i.e.	the	risk	ratio).
Absolute risk reduction (ARR) is the difference between the risk of an 
event	in	the	treated	group	and	the	risk	of	an	event	in	the	control	group	(i.e.	
risk	in	treatment	group	minus	risk	in	control	group).
In	the	Parkinson’s	trial,	the	relative	risk	was	0.095/0.258	=	0.368.	
This	means	that	the	risk	of	dyskinesia	was	63.2%	lower	in	the	ROP	group.	
However,	the	ARR	was	0.258−0.095	=	0.163.	This	means	that,	by	using	
ROP	rather	than	LD,	the	risk	of	developing	dyskinesia	was	reduced	by	16%.	
While	the	RR	is	useful	for	summarizing	the	trial	findings,	the	ARR	provides	a	
better	indication	of	the	likely	clinical	benefit	of	using	ROP,	rather	than	LD.
Based	on	the	ARR,	the	number needed to treat (NNT) is the reciprocal 
of	the	absolute	risk	reduction	(i.e.	1/ARR).	This	measure	indicates	the	
number of patients that need to be treated to achieve the desired outcome 
in	1	patient	who	would	not	have	benefited	otherwise.
In	the	trial,	the	number	needed	to	treat	=	1/ARR	=	1/0.163	=	6.13.	This	
means	that	at	least	6	patients	would	need	to	be	treated	with	ROP,	rather	
than	LD,	to	achieve	the	desired	outcome	in	1	patient	who	would	not	have	
benefited	otherwise.  
a	Rascol	O,	Brooks	D,	Korczyn	AD	et al.	A	five-	year	study	of	the	incidence	of	dyskinesia	
in	patients	with	early	Parkinson’s	disease	who	were	treated	with	ropinirole	or	
levodopa.	N Engl J Med	2000;	342:1484–1491.
Box 4.6  Relative risk, absolute risk and number needed to 
treat – worked example
95% confidence interval
We	can	be	95%	confident	that	the	true	value	lies	within	the	limits	given. 
p- value
The	likelihood	that	a	given	result	has	occurred	by	chance	alone	(e.g.	if	
p<0.001,	then	the	result	would	occur	only	1	:	1000	times	by	chance).
Box 4.7  Estimating confidence in research findings
4
Applying the evidence 79
EBP
,QWHUYHQWLRQ
,QWHUQDOLQIOXHQFHV
HJORFDOUHVRXUFHV
WHDPVWUXFWXUH
([WHUQDOLQIOXHQFHV
HJQDWLRQDOSROLWLFDO
HQYLURQPHQW
Fig. 4.2 Contextual factors that influence the implementation of 
evidence.
The difference could also stem from the fact that improvement 
in a biomedical end- point does not produce the expected health 
gain. For example, although fluoride treatment for osteoporosis 
increases a commonly measured biomedical end- point (non- 
vertebral bone density), it actually raises fracture rates (an im -
portant clinical end- point) because it increases skeletal fragility. 
Consequently, it is not effective treatment for postmenopausal 
osteoporosis. 
Patient- centred outcome measures
Research only has external validity if it reflects the wider priori -
ties of patients and, for population health research, the public. For 
this reason, the outcomes of most relevance to patients must be 
included in trials. In one study, for example, patients with multiple 
sclerosis and their doctors were independently asked to select the 
three aspects of the disease that had the greatest effect on quality 
of life. Doctors focused mainly on the physical effects of the dis -
ease, whereas patients were more concerned about mental health, 
emotional wellbeing, general health and vitality, which are often not 
measured in RCTs. Similarly, in RCTs of anticonvulsants, individuals 
with epilepsy are much more interested in the proportion of patients 
rendered free of seizures than they are in changes in mean seizure 
frequency (a commonly used measure of benefit in RCTs). 
Barriers and facilitators to change
Almost all healthcare interventions are complex and involve sev -
eral interacting components. For example, a new drug therapy may 
superficially seem simple to implement and yet the process might 
actually require additional patient monitoring or allow manage -
ment to move from an inpatient to a community setting, requiring 
a change in care pathways. Other new interventions may neces -
sitate amendments to referral processes (e.g. by allowing direct 
access to hospital care) or involve care provision by different staff 
(e.g. allied health professionals rather than doctors). These changes 
may involve modification of working practices, equipment and care 
setting, and entail additional unforeseen costs. It is often not clear 
which of the specific components of these complex interventions 
represent the ‘active ingredient’ for bringing about the intervention’s 
effect.
If interventions are to be rolled out in other settings, careful 
consideration should be given to ensuring that interventions are 
designed in such a way as to be easily and successfully replicated. 
This involves trying to identify not only the key ‘ingredients’ that 
must be included, but also whether or not the intervention might be 
sensitive to particular features of the local setting.
Intervention context
Barriers to change can arise at different levels in the healthcare 
system: the patient, their carer and family, the individual care pro -
fessional, the healthcare team, the healthcare organization (e.g. its 
resources, capabilities, structure, culture and politics) and wider 
society (e.g. the economic, social and political environment). Each 
of these components makes up the context of the intervention 
(Fig. 4.2). When a new intervention is being implemented, consid -
eration should be given to what will happen when these individual 
contextual factors interact. Because of the complexity and diver -
sity of each of these factors, the effect is likely to differ in different 
settings.
For example, reduction in hospital- acquired infections is a 
healthcare priority in many countries. Hand- washing plays a key 
role. However, concordance on the part of healthcare workers in 
general, and doctors in particular, is known to be poor. Doctors 
are generally aware of the evidence but overestimate their own 
hand- washing practices. Most countries and many hospitals have 
guidelines on prevention of infections but they are frequently not fol-
lowed. This means that, despite well- established evidence that has 
been properly disseminated, performance remains poor.
What is the problem? Research has shown that a range of com-
peting demands reduce the likelihood of doctors washing their 
hands. These include a high workload; organization of the ward and 
access to facilities; concerns about skin irritation; lack of knowl -
edge of the evidence; a lack of leadership to encourage change 
and mutual accountability; and an absence of institutional policies. 
Even if doctors are aware of the evidence and are willing to change, 
altering well- established patterns of care is difficult, if the clinical 
environment is not conducive to change. These factors will be pres-
ent to differing extents in different settings. The key ones should be 
identified in each location to ensure that change comes about. 
Leadership
Local leadership has been identified as key to ensuring that evi -
dence is used in practice. Leadership includes the actions taken by 
formal leaders in an organization to influence change. The attributes 
and qualities of leaders that appear to facilitate the use of research 
evidence to change practice include:
	 •		valuing	research
	 •		being	knowledgeable	about	research
	 •		role-	modelling	evidence-	based	practice
	 •		involving	other	staff	in	decision-	making
	 •		supporting	changes	in	practice
	 •		ensuring	that	policy	and	procedures	are	evidence-	based	and	
up-to-date.
Resistant leadership that fails to support change reduces the 
likelihood that evidence will be applied in practice. 
Improving the uptake of evidence
There is a growing body of evidence relating to the effectiveness 
of different interventions to improve the uptake of evidence and 
change clinical and public health practice, which includes synthe -
sizing and disseminating evidence in more accessible formats. For 
example, information graphics (or ‘infographics’) utilize images and 
data visualizations (pie charts, bar graphs, line graphs) to present 
research in an engaging way. Infographics add value by enhancing 
understanding and the reach of research. Information is more likely 
to be retained if it has been learned from an infographic than from 
text alone. However, although this may help ensure the uptake of 
4
 80 Evidence- based practice
some simple changes, it is insufficient for most innovations. Instead, 
 multifaceted approaches are required, including a combination of:
	• 		Educational strategies. Large conferences and courses have 
limited effects; small group interactive education sessions with 
active participation have more positive results. Educational out-
reach by experts may be especially effective for improving pre -
scribing behaviour.
	• 		Audit and feedback . These seem to be most effective when 
targeting diagnostic test ordering and prevention interventions. 
The effect size depends on the type of feedback, its source and 
format, and the frequency or intensity of presentation. Feedback 
is recommended in combination with education, outreach visits 
or reminders.
	• 		Use of reminders and computers . Computer prompts, for 
example, may be one of the most effective interventions. They 
have been shown to be particularly effective for increasing the 
use of prevention interventions, e.g. vaccination and cancer 
screening reminders.
All of these interventions have the potential to help facilitate the 
effective transfer of evidence to practice, although the evidence 
base for them is still emerging. More than one approach may be 
needed. Further research is on- going to increase understanding of 
the processes and elements behind successful change.
Further reading
Bauer M, Damschroder L, Hagedorn H et al . An introduction to implementation 
science for the non- specialist. BMC Psychol 2015; 3:32.
Grol R, Grimshaw J. From best evidence to best practice: effective 
implementation of change in patients’ care. Lancet 2003; 362:1225–1230.
Wensing M. Implementation science in healthcare: introduction and perspective. 
J Evid Training Qual Health Care 2015; 109:97–102.
Online material at StudentConsult.com includes a significant amount 
of additional content, including practical exercises based on pub -
lished clinical evidence, to help readers put into practice the principles 
described in this chapter.
4
Appraising the evidence 80.e1
EBPSECTION 1: ASKING ANSWERABLE 
QUESTIONS AND SEARCHING FOR 
THE EVIDENCE
Q1: Sarah is a 37- year- old woman who asks for your advice 
about managing her mild depression. She is reluctant to 
take medication, and wonders if regular exercise might 
improve her mental health.
For the vignette above, please set out:
 a.  An answerable clinical question
 b.  PICO terms
 Question 1b
Patient Problem 
or Population
Intervention or 
Exposure
Comparison or 
Control
Outcome  
Measure
 c.  Search terms for use in an online database (e.g. Medline)
Model answer:
 a.  Answerable clinical question: Is exercise as effective as 
drug therapy in reducing symptoms of mild depression in 
women?
 b.  PICO terms
 Answer 1b
Patient Problem 
or Population
Intervention or 
Exposure
Comparison or 
Control
Outcome 
 Measure
Mild depression Exercise Drug therapy Reducing 
symptoms of 
depression
 c.  Search terms for use in an online database (e.g. Medline)
“depression” AND exercise
“depression” AND exercise AND drug AND symptoms
Q2: Elizabeth is 62 and suffers from chronic obstructive 
 pulmonary disease, for which she takes regular medication. 
You wonder whether she might also benefit from pulmonary 
rehabilitation.
For the vignette above, please set out:
 a.  An answerable clinical question
 b.  PICO terms
 Question 2b
Patient Problem or 
Population
Intervention or 
Exposure
Comparison or 
Control
Outcome 
 Measure
 c.  Search terms for use in an online database (e.g. Medline) 
Model answer:
 a.  Answerable clinical question: In patients over the age of 
65 years who suffer from chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease, does pulmonary rehabilitation in conjunction with 
pharmacological treatment significantly improve quality of 
life?
 b.  PICO terms
 Answer 2b
Patient Problem 
or Population
Intervention or 
Exposure
Comparison or 
Control
Outcome 
Measure
Patients <65 
years old 
suffering from 
COPD
Pulmonary rehabili-
tation in conjunc-
tion with current 
pharmacological 
treatment
Standard 
pharmacological 
treatment without 
pulmonary reha-
bilitation
Improved 
 quality of 
life
 c.  Search terms for use in an online database (e.g. Medline)
“COPD” AND pulmonary rehabilitation
“COPD” AND “pulmonary rehabilitation” AND “quality of life”
Q3: David is 67 and has had four episodes of cellulitis affecting 
his lower leg. You wonder whether he might benefit from 
prophylactic antibiotics.
For the vignette above, please set out:
 a.  An answerable clinical question
 b.  PICO terms
 Question 3b
Patient Problem 
or Population
Intervention or 
Exposure
Comparison or 
Control
Outcome 
 Measure
 c.  Search terms for use in an online database (e.g. Medline) 
Model answer:
 a.  Answerable clinical question: In patients with recurrent 
cellulitis, do prophylactic antibiotics reduce the risk of the 
infection recurring, compared with no treatment?
 b.  PICO terms
 Answer 3b
Patient Problem or 
Population
Intervention or 
Exposure
Comparison or 
Control
Outcome 
 Measure
Patients with  
recurrent cellulitis
Prophylactic 
antibiotics
No treatment Repeat 
 infection
 c.  Search terms for use in an online database (e.g. Medline)
“recurrent cellulitis” AND “prophylactic antibiotics”
“recurrent cellulitis” AND “prophylactic antibiotics” AND infection 
SECTION 2: CRITICAL APPRAISAL
In this section, you should read and critically appraise the following 
papers:
Lamb SE, Sheehan B, Atherton N et al. Dementia and Physical Activ-
ity (DAPA) trial of moderate to high intensity exercise training for people 
with dementia: randomised controlled trial. BMJ 2018;361:k1675.
Li L, Geraghty OC, Mehta Z, Rothwell PM. Age- specific risks, 
severity, time course, and outcome of bleeding on long- term anti-
platelet treatment after vascular events: a population- based cohort 
study. Lancet 2017; 390:490–499.
CASP checklists can be downloaded at https://casp- 
uk.net/casp- tools- checklists/. Specimen answers are provided for 
your reference at https://coursewareobjects.elsevier.com/objects/
elr/Kumar/clinicalmedicine10e/PDF/. 
4
 80.e2 Evidence- based practice
SECTION 3: INTERPRETING ODDS 
RATIOS, CONFIDENCE INTERVALS 
AND P- VALUES
Paper 1
If tuberculosis treatment is not taken regularly, there may be risks 
to the patient and the public through generation of drug resis -
tance, relapse and transmission of infection. Consequently, Directly 
Observed Treatment (DOT) is currently recommended by the World 
Health Organization for patients at high risk of poor adherence: for 
example, those with a history of homelessness, imprisonment, or 
drug use. Although DOT can be administered in clinic, community 
or home settings, it still entails substantial inconvenience to patients 
and service providers. Developments in video technology have 
raised the possibility of remote video- observed treatment (VOT) as 
an alternative approach.
This study was carried out to test whether or not levels of treat -
ment observation were improved with VOT. Patients who were at 
least 16 years old, with active pulmonary or non- pulmonary tuber-
culosis and eligible for DOT, were identified from 22 clinics in Eng -
land. Individuals were then randomly assigned to either VOT (daily 
remote observation using a smartphone app) or DOT (observations 
done three to five times per week in the home, community, or clinic 
settings). The primary outcome was completion of 80% or more 
scheduled treatment observations over the first 2 months following 
enrolment.
A total of 226 patients were randomly assigned: 112 to VOT and 
114 to DOT. Some 78 (70%) of 112 patients on VOT successfully 
completed ≥80% scheduled observations during the first 2 months, 
compared with 35 (31%) of 114 on DOT. Adjusted odds ratio (OR) 
5.48, 95% CI 3.10–9.68; p<0.0001.
Adapted from Story A et al. Smartphone- enabled video- observed 
versus directly observed treatment for tuberculosis: a multicentre, 
analyst- blinded, randomised, controlled superiority trial.  Lancet 
2019; 393(10177):1216–1224.
Q1: What type of study is this?
Answer
A randomized controlled trial. Participants were randomly assigned 
to receive either the intervention, VOT (daily remote observa -
tion using a smartphone app) or the usual treatment/control, DOT 
(observations done three to five times per week in the home, com -
munity, or clinic settings).
Q2: What is the odds ratio in this study? 
Answer
5.18.
Q3: What does this mean in practice? 
Answer
An odds ratio is a relative measure of the effectiveness of the inter-
vention being studied, which allows the comparison of the interven-
tion group of a study to the comparison or placebo group.
The trial above compared participants who had received Video 
Observed Therapy (VOT, intervention arm) with participants who 
had received Directly Observed Therapy (DOT, control arm). The 
outcome – or event – of interest was ≥80% scheduled observations 
successfully completed during the first 2 months.
An odds ratio of 5.18 means that patients in the VOT group 
(intervention arm) were more than 5 times as likely to successfully 
complete ≥80% scheduled treatment observations, compared with 
the DOT group (control arm).
Here, the outcome is a desirable one (successful completion of 
treatment).
The OR is >1, so the intervention is better than the control – the 
odds of the outcome occurring is greater in the intervention group.
If the OR were <1, the control would be better than the interven-
tion – the odds of the outcome occurring is lower in the intervention 
group.
If the OR were = 1, there would be no difference between the two 
study groups, as the outcome is the same in both.
Q4: The authors report an adjusted odds ratio. What does this 
mean? 
Answer
The authors used a statistical technique (logistic regression) to 
adjust for – or take into account – other factors, which might impact 
the likelihood of patients successfully completing ≥80% scheduled 
treatment observations. These factors are listed in the footnotes 
for Table 2, and include time since start of treatment, age, sex and 
social risk factors such as homelessness and imprisonment.
Q5: What is the confidence interval? 
Answer
95% CI 3.10–9.68.
Q6: What does this mean in practice? 
Answer
The confidence interval indicates the level of uncertainty around 
the measure of the effectiveness of the intervention being studied 
(i.e. how precise the effect estimate is), which in this study was 
expressed as an odds ratio. Confidence intervals are used because 
a study recruits only a small sample of the overall population. By 
interpreting upper and lower confidence limits, we can conclude 
that the true population effect lies between these two points. Most 
studies report the 95% confidence interval (95% CI).
If the confidence interval crosses 1 (e.g. 95% CI 0.9–1.1), this 
implies that there is no difference between the two arms of the 
study. If it does not (e.g. 95% CI 0.7–0.8), then a difference exists.
In the trial comparing VOT to DOT, the confidence interval is 
reported as 95% CI = 3.10–9.68. This can be interpreted as follows: 
we can be 95% confident that the true effect of VOT lies between 
3.1 times and 9.68 times greater than the effect of DOT.
Q7: What is the p- value? 
Answer
p<0.0001.
Q8: What does this mean in practice? 
Answer
The p- value in this study is <0.0001. This means that, if VOT actually 
had no effect, compared to DOT, there is a 0.01% of chance that 
the study result (i.e. the observed difference) occurred by chance.
A p- value of <0.05 indicates that there is a statistically significant 
difference between groups. P- values of >0.05 indicate that the dif -
ference is not statistically significant.
Q9: How would you summarize the findings of this study? 
Answer
This trial was carried out to examine whether or not levels of treat -
ment observation were improved with Video Observed Therapy 
(VOT), compared with conventional Directly Observed Therapy 
(DOT). The results were presented as adjusted odds ratio = 5.48, 
95% CI 3.10–9.68; p<0.0001. This means that the odds of patients 
successfully completing ≥80% scheduled treatment observations 
were more than 5 times greater in the VOT arm, compared with the 
DOT arm, and we can be 95% confident that the true population 
4
Appraising the evidence 80.e3
EBP
effect lies between 3.1 times and 9.68 times greater. This result was 
statistically significant.
As a consequence, the authors concluded that VOT was a more 
effective approach to observation of tuberculosis treatment than 
DOT. They note that VOT is likely to be preferable to DOT for many 
patients across a broad range of settings, providing a more accept-
able, effective and cheaper option for supervision of daily and mul-
tiple daily doses than DOT. 
Paper 2
When a meniscal tear is judged to be the cause of knee pain, surgi-
cal treatment to remove the unstable meniscal tissue – arthroscopic 
partial meniscectomy is frequently recommended, and is one of 
the most common orthopaedic surgical procedures worldwide. 
However, after the publication of the results of several random -
ized controlled clinical trials, the effectiveness of the procedure has 
been debated. A key concern is the occurrence of rare but serious 
complications.
In this trial, the researchers analysed national Hospital Episode 
Statistics data for all arthroscopic partial meniscectomies done in 
England between 1 April 1997, and 31 March 2017. They identified 
complications occurring in the 90 days post surgery. The primary 
outcome was the occurrence of at least one serious complication 
within 90 days, which was defined as either myocardial infarction, 
stroke, pulmonary embolism, infection requiring surgery, fasciot -
omy, neurovascular injury, or death. Logistic regression modelling 
was used to identify factors associated with complications.
During the study period 1,088,782 arthroscopic partial menis -
cectomies were done, 699,965 of which were eligible for analysis. 
Within 90 days, serious complications occurred in 2218 (0.317% 
[95% CI 0.304–0.330]) cases. The results included an adjusted odds 
ratio for increased age of 1.247 per decade (95% CI 1.208–1.288) 
and 0.640 (95% CI 0.580–0.705) for female sex.
Adapted from: Abram S, et  al. Adverse outcomes after 
arthroscopic partial meniscectomy: a study of 700  000 procedures 
in the national Hospital Episode Statistics database for England.  
Lancet 2018; 392(10160):2194–2202.
Q1: What type of study is this?
Answer
A cohort study. The research examined outcomes in a group (i.e. 
cohort) of patients who underwent an arthroscopic partial menis -
cectomy in England between 1 April 1997 and 31 March 2017.
Q2: What is the odds ratio for increasing age in this study? 
Answer
1.247 per decade.
Q3: What does this mean in practice? 
Answer
In a cohort study, an odds ratio (OR) is a measure of association 
between an exposure and an outcome. This study sought to identify 
factors that are associated with serious postoperative complications 
in patients who underwent an arthroscopic partial meniscectomy. 
The primary outcome measure was the presence of at least one 
serious complication within 90 days. The authors identified a num -
ber of factors which could be associated with a lesser or greater risk 
of complications (i.e. exposures). These are listed in the Statistical 
Analysis section of the Methods, and include age group, sex and 
ethnicity.
The OR represents the odds that an outcome (i.e. serious post -
operative complications) will occur given a particular exposure 
(e.g. age, sex and ethnicity), compared to the odds of the outcome 
occurring in the absence of that exposure. In the case of demo -
graphic variables, such as age and sex, the comparison usually 
made to a pre- specified baseline sub- group of participants (e.g. 
in this study, males or patients aged <20). A statistical technique 
known as logistic regression is then used to estimate the change in 
the likelihood of the outcome occurring, associated with a one- unit 
increase in the exposure.
To examine the effect of age, patients were allocated to one of 
five age groups (see Table 3). In this case the OR for the effect of 
increasing age was 1.247 per decade. This means that the odds 
of patients experiencing serious complications (outcome) increased 
by 24.7% with each decade of life (exposure).
Here, the outcome is an undesirable one (serious postoperative 
complications).
The OR is >1 so the exposure (increasing age) is associated with 
higher odds of outcome.
If the OR were <1, the exposure would be associated with lower 
odds of outcome.
If the OR = 1, there would be no difference between the two 
study groups, as the outcome is the same in both, so the exposure 
does not affect the odds of outcome.
Q4: What is the confidence interval for increasing age? 
Answer
95% CI 1.208–1.288.
Q5: What does this mean in practice? 
Answer
The confidence interval indicates the level of uncertainty around 
the measure of the effectiveness of the intervention being studied 
(i.e. the precision of the effect estimate), which in this study was 
expressed as an odds ratio. Confidence intervals are used because 
a study recruits only a sample of the overall population. By inter -
preting upper and lower confidence limits, we can infer that the true 
population effect lies between these two points. Most studies report 
the 95% confidence interval (95% CI).
In this study, the 95% confidence interval for the estimate of the 
effect of increasing age = 1.208–1.288. This can be interpreted as 
follows: we can be 95% confident that the true population effect lies 
between 20.8% and 28.8%.
In a cohort study, if the confidence interval crosses 1 (e.g. 95% 
CI 0.9–1.1), this implies that the exposure does not affect the odds 
of the outcome. If it does not (e.g. 95% CI 0.7–0.8, or 1.05–1.23) 
then the exposure has a true effect.
Q6: What is the odds ratio for female sex in this study? 
Answer
0.640.
Q7: What does this mean in practice? 
Answer
See Q5 above for a detailed explanation of how to interpret odds 
ratios calculated for cohort studies.
In this case, the researchers compared the odds of serious 
complications (outcome) in male and female patients compared to 
males (i.e. the exposure is female sex). The odds ratio in female 
patients was 0.640. This means that, compared with males, the 
odds of women experiencing serious complications are around a 
third lower (36%).
Here, the outcome is an undesirable one (serious postoperative 
complications).
The OR is <1 so the exposure (female sex) is associated with 
lower odds of outcome.
4
 80.e4 Evidence- based practice
If the OR were >1, the exposure would be associated with higher 
odds of outcome.
If the OR = 1, there would be no difference between the two 
study groups, as the outcome is the same in both, so the exposure 
does not affect the odds of outcome.
Q8: What is the confidence interval for female sex? 
Answer
95% CI 0.580–0.705.
Q9: What does this mean in practice? 
Answer
See above for a detailed explanation of how to interpret odds ratios 
calculated for cohort studies.
In this study, the 95% confidence interval for the estimate of 
the effect of female sex = 0.580–0.705. This can be interpreted as 
follows: we can be 95% confident that the true odds in females is 
between 29.5% and 42% lower than the true odds in males.
Q10: How would you summarize the findings of this study? 
Answer
This study was carried out to examine the factors that are associ -
ated with serious complications in patients who have undergone 
an arthroscopic partial meniscectomy. The results included an 
adjusted odds ratio for increased age of 1.247 per decade (95% 
CI 1.208–1.288) and 0.640 (95% CI 0.580–0.705) for female sex. 
This means that the odds of serious complications increased by 
24.7% with every decade of life, and we can be confident that the 
true population effect lies between 20.8% and 28.8%. The adjusted 
odds ratio for female sex was 0.640 (95% CI 0.580–0.705). This 
means that compared with males, the odds of women experienc -
ing serious complications are around a third lower (36%). The true 
population effect lies between 29.5% and 42%.
Increasing age was associated with an increased risk of serious 
complications, whilst female sex was associated with a reduced risk 
of serious complications. 
Paper 3
Children with persistent hearing loss due to otitis media with effu -
sion, also known as ‘glue ear’, are commonly managed by surgi -
cal intervention. Previous poor- quality trials have found short- term 
benefit from oral steroids. The aim of this study was to investigate 
whether a short course of oral steroids would achieve acceptable 
hearing in children with persistent otitis media with effusion and 
hearing loss.
Participants were children aged 2–8 years with symptoms 
attributable to otitis media with effusion for at least 3 months and 
with confirmed bilateral hearing loss. Individuals were allocated to 
receive either prednisolone (an oral steroid) or an identical placebo. 
The primary outcome was audiometry- confirmed acceptable hear-
ing at 5 weeks. A total of 200 individuals were assigned to receive 
oral steroids and 189 to receive placebo. Hearing at 5 weeks was 
assessed in 183 children in the oral steroid group and in 180 in the 
placebo group. Acceptable hearing was observed in 73 (40%) chil -
dren in the oral steroid group and in 59 (33%) in the placebo group. 
Adjusted odds ratio 1.36 ([95% CI 0.88–2.11]; p = 0.16).
Adapted from Francis N, et  al.  Oral steroids for resolution 
of otitis media with effusion in children (OSTRICH): a double- 
blinded, placebo- controlled randomised trial . Lancet 2018; 
392(10147):557–568.
Q1: What type of study is this?
Answer
A randomized controlled trial. Participants were randomly assigned 
to receive either prednisolone (the intervention) or an identical 
placebo.
Q2: What is the odds ratio in this study? 
Answer
1.36.
Q3: What does this mean in practice? 
Answer
An odds ratio is a relative measure of the effectiveness of the inter-
vention being studied, which allows the comparison of the interven-
tion group of a study to the comparison or placebo group.
The trial above compared participants who had received pred -
nisolone (the intervention) with participants who had received an 
identical placebo (the control group). The outcome of interest was 
audiometry- confirmed acceptable hearing at 5 weeks.
An odds ratio of 1.36 means that patients in the prednisolone 
group (intervention group) were 36% more to have audiometry- 
confirmed acceptable hearing at 5 weeks, compared with the pla -
cebo group (control group).
Here, the outcome is a desirable one (audiometry- confirmed 
acceptable hearing).
The OR is >1, so the intervention is better than the control – the 
odds of the outcome occurring is greater in the intervention group.
If the OR were <1, the control would be better than the interven-
tion – the odds of the outcome occurring is lower in the intervention 
group.
If the OR were = 1, there would be no difference between the two 
study groups, as the outcome is the same in both.
Q4: The authors report an adjusted odds ratio. What does this 
mean? 
Answer
The authors used a statistical technique (logistic regression) to 
adjust for – or take into account – other factors, which might impact 
the likelihood of patients having audiometry- confirmed acceptable 
hearing at 5 weeks. These factors are listed in the footnotes for 
Table 2, and include site of recruitment, child’s age group at recruit-
ment (2–5 years vs 6–8 years) and time since recruitment to 5- week 
assessment.
Q5: What is the confidence interval? 
Answer
95% CI 0.88–2.11.
Q6: What does this mean in practice? 
Answer
The confidence interval indicates the level of uncertainty around 
the measure of the effectiveness of the intervention being stud -
ied (i.e. how precise the effect estimate is), which in this study 
was expressed as an odds ratio. Confidence intervals are used 
because a study recruits only a small sample of the overall pop -
ulation. By interpreting upper and lower confidence limits, we 
can conclude that the true population effect lies between these 
two points. Most studies report the 95% confidence interval 
(95%CI).
If the confidence interval crosses 1 (e.g. 95% CI 0.9–1.1), 
this implies that there is no difference between the two arms of 
the study. If it does not (e.g. 95% CI 0.7–0.8), then a difference 
exists.
4
Appraising the evidence 80.e5
EBP
In this study comparing prednisolone to placebo, the confidence 
interval is reported as 95% CI = 0.88–2.11. As the confidence inter-
val crosses 1, this implies that there is no difference between the 
two treatments. We can be 95% confident that, on the one hand, 
individuals who took prednisolone may be 12% less likely to achieve 
acceptable hearing, or – on the other – up to 2.11 times more likely, 
compared to those who took the placebo.
Q7: What is the p- value? 
Answer
p=0.16.
Q8: What does this mean in practice? 
Answer
The p- value in this study is 0.16. This means that, if prednisolone 
actually had no effect, compared to the placebo, there is a 16% 
chance that the study result (i.e. the observed difference) occurred 
by chance.
A p- value of <0.05 indicates that there is a statistically significant 
difference between groups. P- values of >0.05 (such as this one) 
indicate that the difference is not statistically significant.
Q9: How would you summarize the findings of this study? 
Answer
This trial was carried out to examine whether a short course of oral 
steroids would achieve acceptable hearing in children with persis -
tent otitis media with effusion and hearing loss. The results were 
presented as an adjusted odds ratio = 1.36 (95% CI 0.88–2.11); 
p=0.16. This means that the likelihood of patients achieving accept-
able hearing was 36% higher in the prednisolone group, compared 
with the placebo group. However, the confidence interval crosses 1, 
so there is no real difference between the two arms of the study. The 
p- value is also >0.05, which indicates that the result is not statisti -
cally significant.
As a consequence, the authors concluded that a short course 
of oral prednisolone is not an effective treatment for most children 
aged 2–8 years with persistent otitis media with effusion. 
SECTION 4: MULTIPLE CHOICE 
QUESTIONS
Questions
Correct answers are indicated in bold
 1.  Which of the following is a primary source of evidence?
 a.  Medline
 b.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
 c.  Research papers
 2.  Which of the following is not a component in the PICO ap -
proach to developing structured clinical questions?
 a.  Patient
 b.  Comparison
 c.  Observations
 3.  Which of these three study types is regarded as the strongest 
form of evidence in the ‘hierarchy of evidence’?
 a.  Randomized controlled trials
 b.  Case series
 c.  Observational studies
 4.  What is the goal of randomization in an RCT?
 a.  To ensure that study groups are as similar as possible
 b.  To ensure that allocation to the intervention or control arm 
is fair
 c.  To ensure that similar numbers of participants are allocated 
to each study arm
 5.  Which of the following is not true of pragmatic RCTs?
 a.  Outcome measures are chosen represent the full range of 
health gains relevant to patients and clinicians
 b.  Pragmatic trials should represent the spectrum of patients 
to whom the treatment will be applied
 c.  Patients and clinicians must be blinded to the intervention 
that is being delivered
 6.  Which of the following statements is true of cohort studies?
 a.  No adjustments are made to participants’ treatments or life-
style
 b.  Cohort studies are always retrospective (i.e. looking back in 
time)
 c.  Cohort studies cannot be used to study rare outcomes
 7.  Which of the following statements is true of case- control stud-
ies?
 a.  There is a high risk of recall bias affecting the results
 b.  Careful matching of cases and controls eliminates the risk 
of unknown confounding factors affecting the results
 c.  Information is usually gathered from cases and controls via 
focus groups
 8.  Qualitative research methods (e.g. interviews and focus groups) 
can be useful to explore which of the following type of question?
 a.  The number of patients living with a condition
 b.  Whether or not a new intervention is acceptable to patients
 c.  The likely length of time between diagnosis of a condition 
and death
 9.  In a study with high internal validity, which of the following is 
correct?
 a.  The study findings are relevant to patients in other settings
 b.  The study is sufficiently free from bias
 c.  The study team is reputable
 10.  In a study with high external validity, which of the following is 
correct?
 a.  The study findings are relevant to patients in other settings
 b.  The study is sufficiently free from bias
 c.  The study team is reputable
 11.  Which of the following is an example of potential information 
bias?
 a.  Participants in a cohort study are all patients at a major 
teaching hospital
 b.  Participants in a case- control study are more likely to 
remember relevant past history if they have the disease of 
interest
 c.  The average age of participants in the intervention arm of 
an RCT is ten years younger than that in the control group
 12.  An odds ratio describes:
 a.  The likelihood of an event occurring in the intervention 
group versus the control group
 b.  The frequency with which an event occurs in the interven-
tion group versus the control group
 c.  The probability of seeing a result, such as the one obtained 
if in fact the intervention had no real effect
 13.  A risk ratio describes:
 a.  The number of people to whom the treatment would have 
to be given to see an effect
 b.  A comparison of the frequency with which an event occurs 
in a group who received an intervention versus a group who 
did not
 c.  The likelihood that an intervention will have no effect versus 
the control
4
 80.e6 Evidence- based practice
 14.  In a study comparing all- cause mortality in patients who have 
received a novel cancer drug, compared with conventional 
medication, the odds ratio is 1.14. This means that:
 a.  There is no difference between the intervention and the 
control
 b.  The control performs better than the intervention
 c.  The intervention performs better than the control
 15.  What does a confidence interval tell us?
 a.  We can be 95% certain that the true value lies within the 
confidence interval limits
 b.  The results are 95% correct, which is sufficient for us to be 
confident in their validity
 c.  The study has involved 95% of the possible participants in 
the population and therefore we can confidently report that 
the results are true for this group
 16.  The p- value reported for an RCT is 0.01. What does this tell us?
 a.  There is a 1% of chance that the study result (i.e. the ob-
served difference) occurred by chance
 b.  The intervention is not effective
 c.  The intervention should be used in routine clinical practice
Answers
Correct answers are indicated in bold
 1.  Which of the following is a primary source of evidence?
 a.  Medline
 b.  Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
 c.  Research papers
 2.  Which of the following is not a component in the PICO ap -
proach to developing structured clinical questions?
 a.  Patient
 b.  Comparison
 c.  Observations
 3.  Which of these three study types is regarded as the strongest 
form of evidence in the ‘hierarchy of evidence’?
 a.  Randomized controlled trials
 b.  Case series
 c.  Observational studies
 4.  What is the goal of randomization in an RCT?
 a.  To ensure that study groups are as similar as possible
 b.  To ensure that allocation to the intervention or control arm 
is fair
 c.  To ensure that similar numbers of participants are allocated 
to each study arm
 5.  Which of the following is not true of pragmatic RCTs?
 a.  Outcome measures are chosen represent the full range of 
health gains relevant to patients and clinicians
 b.  Pragmatic trials should represent the spectrum of patients 
to whom the treatment will be applied
 c.  Patients and clinicians must be blinded to the interven-
tion that is being delivered
 6.  Which of the following statements is true of cohort studies?
 a.  No adjustments are made to participants’ treatments or 
lifestyle
 b.  Cohort studies are always retrospective (i.e. looking back in 
time)
 c.  Cohort studies cannot be used to study rare outcomes
 7.  Which of the following statements is true of case- control stud-
ies?
 a.  There is a high risk of recall bias affecting the results
 b.  Careful matching of cases and controls eliminates the risk 
of unknown confounding factors affecting the results
 c.  Information is usually gathered from cases and controls via 
focus groups
 8.  Qualitative research methods (e.g. interviews and focus groups) 
can be useful to explore which of the following type of question?
 a.  The number of patients living with a condition
 b.  Whether or not a new intervention is acceptable to 
patients
 c.  The likely length of time between diagnosis of a condition 
and death
 9.  In a study with high internal validity, which of the following is 
correct?
 a.  The study findings are relevant to patients in other settings
 b.  The study is sufficiently free from bias
 c.  The study team is reputable
 10.  In a study with high external validity, which of the following is 
correct?
 a.  The study findings are relevant to patients in other set-
tings
 b.  The study is sufficiently free from bias
 c.  The study team is reputable
 11.  Which of the following is an example of potential information 
bias?
 a.  Participants in a cohort study are all patients at a major 
teaching hospital
 b.  Participants in a case- control study are more likely to 
remember relevant past history if they have the disease 
of interest
 c.  The average age of participants in the intervention arm of 
an RCT is ten years younger than that in the control group
 12.  An odds ratio describes:
 a.  The likelihood of an event occurring in the intervention 
group versus the control group
 b.  The frequency with which an event occurs in the interven-
tion group versus the control group
 c.  The probability of seeing a result, such as the one obtained 
if in fact the intervention had no real effect
 13.  A risk ratio describes:
 a.  The number of people to whom the treatment would have 
to be given to see an effect
 b.  A comparison of the frequency with which an event 
occurs in a group who received an intervention versus a 
group who did not
 c.  The likelihood that an intervention will have no effect versus 
the control
 14.  In a study comparing all- cause mortality in patients who have 
received a novel cancer drug, compared with conventional 
medication, the odds ratio is 1.14. This means that:
 a.  There is no difference between the intervention and the control
 b.  The control performs better than the intervention
 c.  The intervention performs better than the control
 15.  What does a confidence interval tell us?
 a.  We can be 95% certain that the true value lies within 
the confidence interval limits
 b.  The results are 95% correct, which is sufficient for us to be 
confident in their validity
 c.  The study has involved 95% of the possible participants in 
the population and therefore we can confidently report that 
the results are true for this group
 16.  The p- value reported for an RCT is 0.01. What does this tell us?
 a.  There is a 1% of chance that the study result (i.e. the 
observed difference) occurred by chance
 b.  The intervention is not effective
 c.  The intervention should be used in routine clinical practice
81
CORE SKILLS AND KNOWLEDGE
At its heart, the practice of medicine is a human endeavour con-
cerned with forming therapeutic relationships with patients. It is 
crucial for everyone practising medicine to understand the moral 
and legal framework that underlies and regulates their work. 
Likewise, effective communication is fundamental to achieving 
optimal patient- centred care, maintaining safety and ensuring 
optimal health outcomes. Patients expect humanity and empa -
thy from their doctors, as well as competence.
In routine practice, ethical and legal decisions are made on 
a daily basis by clinical teams working with patients and, where 
appropriate, involving their families. Sometimes an ethics com -
mittee’s view or a legal opinion may be sought. If situations are 
contested and disagreement seems intractable, the courts will 
occasionally make a decision. Many clinicians have qualifica -
tions in ethics and law, and further study can lead to academic, 
policy, legal, ethical and leadership roles.
All doctors should develop:
	 •		an	awareness	of	key	moral theories and ethical tools
	 •		an	understanding	of	legal	concepts	and	principles
	 •		the	cognitive	skills	necessary	for	reasoning,	critiquing	and	
communicating ethical decisions
	 •		a	range	 of	advanced	 communications	 skills	 for	listening	
and speaking to all types of people in a range of different 
settings.
Communication ability is not just innate. There is an evi -
dence base for effective skills that can be developed by training 
and experience. Reflect carefully about your practice and seek 
feedback. Remain informed about changes in the law, ethical 
guidance and professional standards. University departments, 
specialist sections in general medical journals and, in the UK, 
the General Medical Council, the British Medical Association’s 
ethics team and the Institute of Medical Ethics are good starting 
points for further exploration.
5
Ethical practice and clinical 
communication
Deborah Bowman and Annie Cushing
Ethics and the law 81
Ethics: what it includes and why it matters 81
Ethical practice: sources, resources and approaches 82
Professional guidance and codes of practice 82
The law 83
Respect for autonomy: capacity and consent 83
Confidentiality 87
Resource allocation 87
Professional competence and mistakes 88
Communication in medicine 89
What is patient- centred communication? 89
What are the effects of communication? 90
Barriers and difficulties in communication 90
Teamwork 92
Clinical records 92
Culture, diversity and communication 92
Patients with impaired communication faculties 93
Technology 94
Training in communication skills 94
 ETHICS AND THE LAW
Ethics: what it includes and why it matters
The subject of ethics incorporates knowledge, cognitive skills such 
as reasoning, critique and logical analysis, and skills for integrating 
abstract ethical learning with other clinical learning and applying it 
appropriately. Unless students and clinicians are able to draw on 
learning in ethics to enhance daily practice and better serve their 
patients, ethics education has ultimately failed.
The practice of medicine is inherently moral:
	 •		Biomedical	expertise	and	clinical	science	have	to	be	applied	by	
and to people.
	 •		Medical	decisions	are	underpinned	by	values	and	principles.
	 •		Potential	courses	of	action	will	have	implications	that	are	often	
uncertain.
	 •		Technological	advancements	 sometimes	 have	 unintended	 or	
unforeseen consequences.
The profession has to agree on its collective purpose, aims and 
standards. People are much more than a collection of symptoms 
and signs – they have preferences, priorities, fears and hopes. 
 Doctors, too, are much more than interpreters of symptoms and 
signs  – they also have preferences, priorities, fears and hopes. 
 Ethics is part of practice; it is a practical pursuit.
Ethical reasoning may sound grand or even off- putting but it is 
simply thinking through the available options and weighing the relative 
merits logically and thoroughly. Becoming, and practising as, a doctor 
demands an awareness of, and reflection on, our ethical attitudes. All 
of us have personal values and moral intuitions. In the field of ethics, 
a necessary part of learning is becoming aware of the assumptions on 
which these personal values are based, reflecting on them critically, 
and listening and responding to challenging or opposing beliefs.
A frequently heard complaint about ethics is that there is ‘no right 
answer’. While ethics often incorporates diverse analyses, leading 
sometimes to a number of different conclusions, there are ways of 
approaching an ethical issue that are dependent on an accurate 
5
 82 Ethical practice and clinical communication
understanding of the relevant law, professional guidance  and 
clear elucidation of the relevant moral questions. In other words, 
there is information to learn and there are ways of expressing views 
that provide structure and rigour. Personal views are important, but 
need to acknowledge other perspectives, be supported by reason-
ing and be located in an accurate understanding of the current law 
and relevant professional guidance.
Ethics is commonly characterized as the consideration of big 
moral questions that preoccupy the media. Questions about clon -
ing, stem cells and euthanasia are what many immediately think 
of when the words ‘medical ethics’ are used. However, ethics per -
vades all of medicine. The daily and routine workload is rife with 
ethical questions, choices and dilemmas; introductions to patients, 
dignity on the wards, the use of resources in clinic, the choice of 
antibiotic; knowing whether and when to challenge a colleague, 
how to balance one’s own wellbeing in a demanding clinical prac -
tice, or whether to provide a medical report for a third party – all of 
these are as central to ethics as the issues that pervade the com -
mon representation of this area.
Ethics and law are a core part of most medical curricula and 
postgraduate training programmes. Formal teaching ranges from 
didactic lectures to small group discussions, and from sessions led 
by specialists in ethics to those led by patients. There are plenty of 
specialist books, journals and online resources to provide additional 
material to supplement the core curriculum. Much of what is learned 
in ethics will, like other areas of clinical practice, develop by watch-
ing others. Role models, both positive and less so, are influential, 
and most students and doctors will be exposed to a wide range 
of approaches, ethical engagement and practice. Noting when you 
admire or are discomfited by someone will teach you much about 
what you value and what kind of a practitioner you want to be (and 
remain). 
Ethical practice: sources, resources and 
approaches
Engaging with an ethical issue in clinical practice depends on:
	 •		discerning	the	relevant	moral	question(s)
	 •		looking	at	the	relevant	ethical theories and/or tools
	 •		identifying	applicable	guidance	(e.g.	from	a	professional	body)
	 •		integrating	the	ethical analysis with an accurate account of the 
law (both national and international).
Personal views must be taken into account, but other perspec -
tives should also be acknowledged and supported by reasoning, 
and reflect an accurate understanding of the current law and rel -
evant professional guidance.
Key ethical theories that you might encounter are summarized 
in Box 5.1.
Many people find that frameworks and tools that focus on the 
application of ethical theory to clinical problems are useful. Perhaps 
the best known is the ‘Four Principles’ approach:
	• 		autonomy: allowing ‘self- rule’, i.e. letting patients make their 
own choices and decide what happens to them
	• 		beneficence: doing good, i.e. acting in a patient’s best interests
	• 		non- maleficence: avoiding harm
	• 		justice: treating people equitably and fairly.
For others, a consistent process, almost like a checklist, that 
incorporates the best of each theoretical approach works well. For 
example, whatever the ethical question, one should:
	 •		summarize	the	problem	and	state	the	moral	dilemma(s)
	 •		identify	the	assumptions	being	made	or	that	are	to	be	made
	 •		analyse	with	reference	to	ethical	principles,	consequences,	pro-
fessional guidance and the law
	 •		acknowledge	other	approaches	and	state	the	preferred	one	with	
explanation.
Do not be afraid to experiment with ways of thinking about and 
approaching ethics. Whatever approach you favour, the steps set 
out at the beginning of this section provide a structure. What this 
means in practice is shown in the scenario in Box 5.2. 
Professional guidance and codes of 
practice
As well as ethical theories and frameworks, there are codes of 
practice and professional guidelines . For example, in the UK, 
the standards set out by the General Medical Council (GMC) inform 
doctors’ regulation; if a doctor falls below the expectations of the 
GMC, disciplinary procedures may follow, irrespective of the harm 
caused or whether legal action ensues. In other countries, similar 
professional bodies license doctors and regulate healthcare. All cli-
nicians should be aware of the regulatory framework and profes -
sional standards in the country within which they practise.
Ethical practice and professionalism are significant from the 
earliest days of medical study and training. In the UK, the GMC 
defines the standards expected of medical students, and all medi -
cal schools are required to have ‘fitness to practise’ procedures. 
Students should be aware of their professional obligations from the 
beginning. All medical schools are effectively vouching for a stu -
dent’s suitability for provisional registration at graduation. Medical 
students commonly work with patients from the earliest days of 
their training and are privileged in the access they have to vulner -
able people, confidential information and sensitive situations. As 
such, medical schools have particular responsibilities to ensure that 
students behave professionally and are fit to study, and eventually 
to practise, medicine.
The Hippocratic Oath, although well known, is outdated and 
rarely, if ever, sworn. The symbolic value of taking an oath remains, 
however, and many medical schools expect students to make a for-
mal commitment to maintain ethical standards.
Further reading
General Medical Council. Good Medical Practice. London: GMC; 2013, updated 
2019.
General Medical Council. Medical Students: Professional Values and Fitness to 
Practise. London: GMC; 2016.
General Medical Council. Outcomes for Graduates. London: GMC; 2018. 
	• 		Deontology: a universally applicable rule or duty- based approach to 
morality, e.g. a deontologist would argue that one should always tell the 
truth, irrespective of the consequences.
	• 		Consequentialism: an approach that argues that morality is located in 
consequences. Such an approach will focus on likely risks and benefits.
	• 		Virtue ethics: an approach in which particular traits or behaviours are 
identified as desirable.
	• 		Rights theory: an assessment of morality with reference to the justified 
claims of others. Rights are either ‘natural’ and arise from being human, 
or legal and therefore enforceable in court. Positive rights impose a duty 
on another to act, while negative rights prohibit interference by others.
	• 		Narrative ethics: an approach that argues that morality is embedded in 
the stories shared between patient and clinician, and allows for multiple 
perspectives.
Box 5.1  Key ethical theories
5
Ethics and the law 83
The law
As it pertains to medicine, the law establishes boundaries for what 
is deemed to be acceptable professional practice. The law that 
applies to medicine is both national and international: for example, 
the European Convention on Human Rights ( Box 5.3). In the UK, 
along with other jurisdictions, both statutes and common law  
apply to the practice of medicine ( Box 5.4). There are legal differ -
ences between England and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland.
The majority of cases involving healthcare arise in the civil 
system. Occasionally, a case is subject to criminal law: for exam -
ple, when a patient dies in circumstances that could constitute 
manslaughter. 
Respect for autonomy: capacity and 
consent
Capacity
Capacity is central to ethical decision- making because it is 
the gateway to self- determination ( Box 5.5 ). People can make 
choices only if they have the capacity to do so. The presump -
tion is that adult patients have capacity to make their own deci -
sions. Assessing capacity is a significant ethical undertaking; 
a patient’s freedom to choose depends on it. In England and 
Wales, the Mental Capacity Act 2005 sets out the criteria for 
evaluating whether a person has the capacity to make a decision 
(see p. 800 ). In Scotland, the Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) 
Act 2000 applies. In Northern Ireland, there is no statute but 
common law applies.
Evaluating capacity is not a one- off judgement. Capacity can 
fluctuate and assessments should be regularly reviewed. Capac -
ity should be understood as decision-  and time- specific, and task- 
oriented. People may have capacity to make some choices but 
not others, and capacity is not precluded by specific diagnoses or 
impairments such as dementia. How a doctor communicates can 
enhance or diminish a patient’s capacity, as can pain, fatigue and 
the environment. 
Consent
Consent is integral to ethical and lawful practice. To act without, or 
in opposition to, a patient’s valid consent is, in many jurisdictions, to 
commit an assault or battery. Obtaining consent fosters choice and 
gives meaning to autonomy. Valid consent is:
	 •		given	by	a	patient	with	capacity
	 •		voluntary,	i.e.	free	from	undue	pressure,	coercion	or	persuasion
	 •		sufficiently	informed
	 •		continuing,	i.e.	patients	should	know	that	they	can	change	their	
mind at any time.
The basis of consent
Those seeking consent for a particular intervention must be com -
petent in applying the procedure or treatment and be familiar with 
its problems. While it is good practice for written information to be 
Malik is a junior doctor who works on a busy ward where junior doctors 
frequently care for large numbers of patients. He regularly stays on to complete 
tasks after his shift was due to end and this evening is no exception. As he 
is leaving, Malik is approached by a patient’s son, who is concerned that his 
father, Mr Homa, who has dementia and was admitted following a fall, is ‘in 
unacceptable distress’. Specifically, he tells Malik that his father is ‘too often in 
pain’ and ‘the staff seem too busy to respond’.
Commentary
Discerning the moral question(s)
There are several moral problems or questions that arise, even from this short 
vignette. They include:
	 •		What	is	Malik’s	responsibility,	given	that	he	is	already	working	beyond	his	
contracted hours on the ward?
	 •		Are	there	considerations	of	confidentiality in talking to the patient’s son?
	 •		What	particular	characteristics	and	considerations	apply	to	Mr	Homa	and	
what might that mean for a clinician’s duty of care?
	 •		Does	Mr	Homa	have	capacity? If not, on what basis is care being provided, 
both in general and in relation to the administration of medication?
	 •		What	systemic	factors	might	contribute	to	the	situation	described	by	the	
patient’s son? What is Malik’s role, as an individual within a complex system, 
in terms of raising and addressing those factors?
	 •		Is	Mr	Homa	vulnerable	in	ways	that	potentially	mean	he	is	being,	or	should	
be, treated differently? 
Looking at the relevant ethical theories and/or tools
	 •		What	duties does Malik have and to whom?
	 •		What	might	be	the	consequences of his options and choices, and for 
whom?
	 •		What	would	a	virtuous doctor do in this situation? Which virtues are most 
relevant and why?
	 •		What	would	it	look	like	for	Malik	to	demonstrate	values- based practice in 
responding to this situation?
	 •		Does	Malik	need	to	think	about	using	an	ethical	decision-	making	tool	or	
approach to inform and structure his approach? 
Identifying applicable professional guidance
	 •		What	does	national	and	professional	guidance	on	consent, prescribing and 
confidentiality say that might be relevant?
	 •		Is	there	other	relevant	guidance,	e.g.	from	the	hospital	or	an	appropriate	
health organization, on responding to complaints?
	 •		Are	there	any	safeguarding considerations and, if so, which guidance is 
relevant? 
Integrating the ethical analysis with an accurate account of the law
	 •		What	does	the	law	relating	to	mental	capacity	and	decision-	making	say	
about working with patients who may lack capacity?
	 •		What	criteria	should	Malik	use	to	evaluate	Mr	Homa’s	capacity,	and	have	
they been used appropriately here?
	 •		What	limits	are	there	to	sharing	confidential	information,	even	with	a	family	
member?
	 •		Might	the	patient’s	son	be	Mr	Homa’s	legal	proxy?	How	would	Malik	know,	
and what might it mean?
	 •		What	legal	obligations	apply	to	individual	clinicians	working	for	a	large	NHS	
organization, and what does this mean for Malik’s responsibilities in this 
case?
	 •		If	Malik	had	concerns	about	Mr	Homa’s	care,	how	would	he	raise	those	
lawfully and effectively?
	 •		How	might	Malik’s	response	relate	to	the	law	concerning	medical	
negligence?
Malik is unlikely to think about all of these things at the same time and, 
depending on where he is working and who is available to support him, some 
areas will be more relevant or constitute greater priorities than others. Of course, 
Malik is also a busy junior doctor who needs to make a decision and get home! 
With an ethical disposition and an internal capacity to think about a situation from 
different perspectives and perhaps make time to reflect on it afterwards, Malik is 
well placed to make a considered choice that is grounded in both principle and 
the practicalities of a demanding clinical service. He can also, if asked, explain 
why he responded as he did, which, as a junior doctor, is an essential skill.
Box 5.2  Vignette 1
5
 84 Ethical practice and clinical communication
provided, offering leaflets and using a consent form do not remove 
the responsibility to talk to the patient. The information that is given 
should be that which a reasonable person in the patient’s situation 
would require and doctors must be alert to the particular priorities 
and concerns of individuals. Information shared should:
	 •		cover	 potential	 harms	 and	 benefits,	 considering	 how	 these	
might be perceived by the individual patient, e.g. whether some 
elements matter more than others
	 •		explain	possible	consequences	of	treatment	and	non-	treatment
	 •		explain	options
	 •		disclose	uncertainty;	this	should	be	as	much	part	of	the	discus-
sion as sharing what is well understood.
Patients should be encouraged to ask questions and express 
their concerns, values and preferences. Since it is the health and 
lives of patients that are at stake, the moral focus of such disclo -
sure should be on what is acceptable to patients rather than to the 
professionals. 
Consent in educational settings
Medical education and training often take place in clinical envi -
ronments. Future doctors have to learn new skills and apply their 
knowledge to real patients. However, patients must be given a 
choice as to whether they wish to participate in educational activi -
ties. The principles of seeking consent for education are identical to 
those applied to clinical situations. 
Advance decisions
Many countries have laws that allow people to make decisions 
about their future care. In the UK, these are called advance deci -
sions (sometimes colloquially described as ‘living wills’ or, more 
formally, as ‘advance decisions to refuse treatment’). An advance 
decision enables someone to express their wishes about future 
care. Advance decisions are made in anticipation of someone los -
ing capacity. An advance decision may refuse treatment but cannot 
request specific treatment. Where the treatment is life- saving, the 
advance decision must be made in a specific way. Countries have 
differing approaches to advance decision- making and the relevant 
law where medicine is being practised must be understood. In the 
UK, legislation governs advance decisions. For example, the Mental 
Capacity Act 2005 applies in England and Wales, where a legally 
valid advance decision must be:
	 •		made	by	someone	with	capacity
	 •		made	voluntarily
	 •		based	on	appropriate	information
	 •		specific	and	applicable	to	the	situation	in	which	it	is	being	con-
sidered.
In practice, it is often the specificity requirement that is difficult 
to satisfy because inevitable uncertainty surrounds future illness 
and potential treatments or interventions. For some people, the dif-
ficulty in anticipating the future and how they are likely to feel about 
that future informs an ethical objection to advance decision- making.
Format
Advance decisions can be made orally or in writing. However, deci-
sions about withdrawing or withholding life- sustaining treatment 
must be in writing and witnessed. The decision should state explic-
itly that it is intended to include life- saving situations. The more 
informal and non- specific an advance decision is, the more likely 
it is to be challenged or disregarded. If working in a country where 
advance decisions are recognized, clinicians should make reason -
able attempts to establish whether a valid advance decision exists. 
The presumption is to save life where there is ambiguity about either 
the existence or the content of an advance decision. Advance deci-
sions should be periodically reviewed; amendments, revocations or 
additions are possible, provided an individual still has capacity. 
Ethical and practical rationale
The ethical rationale for advance decisions is usually said to be 
respect for patient autonomy and extension of the right to make 
choices about healthcare to the future. Respect for autonomy nec -
essarily involves supporting people to make choices that others 
might consider misguided. Some suggest that advance decisions 
foster trust and effective clinical relationships. However, others 
argue that none of us can have the capacity to make decisions 
about our future care because the person we become when ill dif -
fers from who we are when we are healthy. 
Advance statements
Advance statements are broader than advance decisions and allow 
patients to express preferences and priorities without specifically 
Statutes
	 •		Primary	legislation	made	by	the	state,	e.g.	Acts	of	Parliament	in	the	UK,	
such as the Mental Capacity Act 2005
	 •		Secondary	(or	delegated)	legislation:	supplementary	law	made	by	an	
authority given the power to do so by the primary legislation
	 •		Implementation	(or	statutory)	guidance,	e.g.	the	Mental	Health	Act	Code	
of Practice 
Common law
	 •		Judicial	decisions	made	in	cases:	these	establish	precedents,	which	are	
then applied to future cases
	 •		Precedent:	whether	a	decision	constitutes	a	precedent	depends	on	
which court made the decision – higher- level courts have authority over 
lower- level courts
Box 5.4  Statutes and common law
	 •		Every	adult	has	the	right	to	make	their	own	decisions	and	to	be	assumed	
to have capacity unless proved otherwise.
	 •		Everyone	should	be	encouraged	and	enabled	to	make	their	own	
decisions, or to participate as fully as possible in decision- making.
	 •		Individuals	have	the	right	to	make	eccentric	or	unwise	decisions.
	 •		Proxy	decisions	should	consider	best	interests,	prioritizing	what	the	
patient would have wanted, and should be the ‘least restrictive of basic 
rights and freedoms’.
  
a	Principles	underlying	the	Mental	Capacity	Act	2005	(England	and	Wales),	which	applies 
to patients over the age of 16 years.
Box 5.5  Principles of self- determinationa
	 •		Right	to	life	(Article	2)
	 •		Prohibition	of	torture,	inhuman	
or degrading treatment or 
punishment	(Article	3)
	 •		Prohibition	of	slavery	and	forced	
labour	(Article	4)
	 •		Right	to	liberty	and	security	
(Article	5)
	 •		Right	to	a	fair	trial	(Article	6)
	 •		No	punishment	without	law	 
(Article	7)
	 •		Right	to	respect	for	private	and	
family	life	(Article	8)
	 •		Freedom	of	thought,	conscience	
and	religion	(Article	9)
	 •		Freedom	of	expression	(Article	10)
	 •		Right	to	marry	(Article	12)
	 •		Prohibition	of	discrimination	
(Article	14)
Box 5.3  European Convention on Human Rights:  
substantive rights that apply to evaluating good 
medical practice
5
Ethics and the law 85
ruling out an intervention or treatment. For example, a patient may 
wish to be more lucid than not towards the end of life or may like 
to retain the ability to eat with their family for as long as possible. 
A birth plan is often comprised of advance statements in which 
women express their wishes for their labour and delivery. These 
preferences are not about choosing or ruling out specific treatments 
but are advance statements of wishes regarding the details of future 
care. 
Lasting power of attorney
Some countries allow for the appointment of a proxy: that is, some-
one else to make decisions for patients lacking capacity. In England 
and Wales, consent to or refusal of treatment can be expressed by 
someone who has been granted lasting power of attorney (LPA) by 
a patient at a point when the patient still has the capacity to decide 
on this. The attorney gains the power to represent the patient’s 
interests only when the patient loses capacity and this is registered 
with the Public Guardian. Establish whether there is a valid LPA for 
an incapacitous patient and adhere to the attorney’s wishes. The 
only exception is where the attorney appears not to be acting in the 
patient’s best interests, in which case the matter should be referred to 
the Court of Protection. Like advance decisions, the ethical  rationale 
for LPAs is that prospective autonomy is desirable and facilitates 
informed care, rather than second- guessing patient wishes. 
Best interests of patients who lack capacity
Where an adult lacks capacity to give consent and there is no valid 
advance decision or LPA, clinicians must act in the patient’s best 
interests, which encompasses more than someone’s best medical 
interests. In practice, determining best interests is likely to involve 
several people: for example, members of the healthcare team, pro-
fessionals with whom the patient had a longer- term relationship, 
clinical ethicists, relatives and carers.
In England and Wales, an Independent Mental Capacity Advo -
cacy Service advocates for patients without capacity who have no 
family or friends to represent their interests. In such a situation, peo-
ple, including Independent Mental Capacity Advocates (IMCAs), are 
not making decisions; rather, they are giving an informed sense of 
the patient and their likely preferences.
If someone lacks capacity, it is meaningless to seek consent. 
Box 5.6 shows how decisions for someone who may lack capacity 
are made in practice, as the ethical dimensions of Mr Homa’s care 
and Malik’s response unfold further.
Further reading
General Medical Council. Decision Making and Consent: Supporting Patient 
Choices about Health and Care. London: GMC; 2019. 
Provision or cessation of life- sustaining treatment
For a patient who lacks capacity and has neither an advance deci -
sion nor an LPA, it is considered acceptable not to use medical 
means to prolong life where:
	 •		the	team	believes,	based	on	good	evidence,	that	further	treat-
ment will not save the patient’s life
	 •		the	patient	is	already	imminently	and	irreversibly	close	to	death
	 •		the	patient	is	so	permanently	or	irreversibly	brain-	damaged	that	
they will always be incapable of any future self- directed activity 
or intentional social interaction.
Moral beliefs vary and, in general, decisions not to provide or 
continue life- sustaining treatment should be made with as much 
consensus as possible among the clinical team and those close to 
the patient. Where there is unresolvable conflict, a court should be 
consulted. In the UK, judges are available in the relevant court, even 
in emergencies.
Where clinicians decide not to prolong the lives of imminently 
dying and/or extremely brain- damaged patients, the legal concep -
tualization is that they are acting in the patient’s best interests by 
seeking to minimize suffering rather than intending to kill. Ethically, 
the significance of intention, along with the moral status of acts 
and omissions , is integral to debates about assisted dying and 
euthanasia. 
Assisted dying
The language surrounding assisted dying can be confusing and dis-
puted. Assisted dying is a term that describes what happens when 
someone helps another person to die. Other terms that are used 
include euthanasia, which can be categorized as ‘active’ or ‘pas -
sive’, and ‘voluntary’ or ‘involuntary’. Active and passive refer to 
the distinction sometimes drawn between ‘killing’ and ‘letting die’. 
The terms ‘active’ and ‘passive’ are used infrequently in contemp-
orary medical practice. Voluntary and involuntary euthanasia refer 
to whether an individual has requested or sought an assisted death. 
Assisted dying is the term that is more commonly used. Physician- 
assisted dying is where a doctor helps an individual to die; it is a 
subcategory of ‘assisted dying’.
In many countries, such as the UK, assisted dying is illegal. In 
contrast, some jurisdictions, including the Netherlands, Switzer -
land, Belgium and certain US states, allow assisted dying. Where 
Malik visits Mr Homa. He finds signs of infection, including a high 
temperature, and notes that Mr Homa appears to be in distress. Malik talks 
to Mr Homa about his symptoms and what he believes is happening. He 
notes that Mr Homa is not able to understand or remember information, 
and he shows no ability to weigh things up when Malik explains that he 
wants to begin treatment with antibiotics and do further investigations. 
Malik recognizes that Mr Homa’s confusion might be related to his acute 
symptoms or his dementia but is clear that he should continue to evaluate 
his capacity, irrespective of the diagnosis. Malik concludes that Mr Homa 
lacks capacity and asks to speak to the patient’s concerned son. Malik asks 
him whether his father has a legal proxy or whether Mr Homa made an 
advance statement or decision before he became unwell. Mr Homa’s son 
says that neither applies. Malik explains that he would like to investigate and 
treat Mr Homa in his best interests. Mr Homa’s son is relieved and asks 
when his father is likely to be more comfortable. Malik obtains a chest X- ray, 
blood cultures and blood tests, and starts Mr Homa on a broad- spectrum 
antibiotic pending further information. He also checks with his consultant 
whether Mr Homa’s medication and care plan should be reviewed following 
his new symptoms. Malik asks Mr Homa’s son to let him know if there is 
anything else that might be comforting or supportive for his father while he 
is in hospital. Malik arranges for Mr Homa to be reviewed regularly and for 
that to include consideration of his capacity.
Commentary
Malik follows the steps to manage Mr Homa’s care ethically and lawfully. He 
evaluates his capacity using the criteria set out in the Mental Capacity Act 
and records his findings in a timely way and relating to the specific decision. 
Malik does not assume that Mr Homa lacks capacity because he has 
dementia, and he recognizes that he must assess function and review that 
assessment. Malik asks whether Mr Homa has a lasting power of attorney 
or has made an advance decision about future care. On learning that neither 
is applicable, Malik proceeds on the basis of Mr Homa’s best interests. His 
question about Mr Homa’s on- going comfort and wellbeing after he has 
arranged investigations and begun treatment show that he is alert to best 
interests	beyond	the	merely	medical.	Finally,	he	arranges	for	the	evaluation	
of capacity to be revisited as part of reviewing the patient.
Box 5.6  Vignette 2
5
 86 Ethical practice and clinical communication
assisted dying is not lawful, withholding and withdrawing treatment 
are usually acceptable in strictly defined circumstances, where the 
intention of the clinician is to minimize suffering, not to cause death. 
The doctrine of double effect remains in law, but its clinical appli -
cation is limited because of improved practice and understanding 
in palliative and supportive care. Double effect is the legal doctrine 
that allows clinicians to prescribe medication that has, as its princi-
pal aim, the reduction of suffering but which may have side- effects 
that potentially shorten someone’s life. Such prescribing is legally 
justifiable because the intention is benign and the side- effects, 
while foreseen, are not the primary aim. End- of- life care pathways 
are discussed in Chapter 7.
Although assisted dying is unlawful in the UK, the Director of 
Public Prosecutions (DPP) provides guidance on how prosecu -
tion decisions are made following an action brought by right-  
to- die campaigner Debbie Purdy. Those guidelines indicate what 
circumstances are likely to weigh either in favour of, or against, 
a prosecution and make reference to an individual who has a 
professional role, such as a doctor or nurse. Nevertheless, the 
law itself is clear: for a clinician to end a patient’s life is a criminal 
offence.
The legalization of assisted dying remains a matter of debate 
in the UK, including among doctors and the organizations that 
represent them, such as the Royal Colleges and medical associa -
tions. Those who support a change in the law emphasize patient 
autonomy and choice, arguing that it is morally right that people 
can determine the extent to which they can tolerate illness and 
suffering. Those who oppose assisted dying express concerns 
about vulnerability, the potential for a slippery slope whereby 
regulation is unable to prevent abuse, and arguments that such 
legislative change undermines what they believe to be the inher -
ent sanctity of life. For some doctors, there is a question about 
whether assisting another to die is contrary to the medical role 
as they perceive it. When someone does help a patient to die – 
for example, by supporting their travel to a jurisdiction where 
assisted dying is lawful – the DPP will use guidance to determine 
whether there should be a prosecution. There have been a num -
ber of cases where relatives have been interviewed by the police 
as part of a formal investigation but no prosecutions have yet 
followed.
How the legal and ethical framework apply in practice is shown 
in Box 5.7.
Further reading
General Medical Council. Treatment and Care Towards the End of Life. London: 
GMC; 2010. 
Mental health and consent
The majority of people being treated for psychiatric illness have 
capacity. However, mental illness sometimes compromises an individ-
ual’s capacity to make his or her own decisions. Many countries have 
specific legislation that enables people to be treated without consent 
on the basis that they pose a risk to themselves and/or to others.
People who have, or are suspected of having, a mental disor -
der may be detained for assessment and treatment in England and 
Wales under the Mental Health Act 2007 . The Act was reviewed 
in 2018, but at the time of writing, no changes to the law have yet 
been made. The law defines a mental disorder as ‘any disorder or 
disability of the mind’. Addiction to drugs and alcohol is excluded. 
Appropriate medical treatment should be available to those admit -
ted under the Mental Health Act. In addition, the legislation provides 
for Supervised Community Treatment Orders . The law sets out 
multiple checks and limitations that are essential, given the ethical 
implications of detaining and treating someone against their will.
Even in situations in which it is lawful to give a detained patient 
psychiatric treatment compulsorily, consent should be sought and 
obtained if possible. For concurrent physical illness, capacity should 
be evaluated as usual. If the patient has capacity, consent should 
be obtained for treatment of the physical illness. If a patient lacks 
capacity because of the severity of a psychiatric illness, treatment 
for physical illness should be given on the basis of best interests or 
with reference to a proxy or advance decision. If treatment can be 
postponed without compromising the patient’s interests, consent 
should be sought when the patient has capacity. 
Consent and children
Where a child does not have the capacity to make decisions, treat-
ment will usually depend upon obtaining proxy consent. In the UK, 
consent is sought on behalf of the child from someone with ‘parental 
responsibility’. In the absence of someone with parental responsibil-
ity – for example, in emergencies, where urgent treatment is indi -
cated – clinicians proceed on the basis of the child’s best interests.
Sometimes parents and doctors disagree about the care of a 
child who is too young to make their own decisions. Both national 
and European case law demonstrate that the courts are prepared 
to override parental beliefs if they are perceived to compromise the 
child’s best interests. However, the courts have also emphasized 
that a child’s best medical interests are not necessarily the same as 
a child’s best overall interests or welfare. Whenever the patient is 
a child, clinicians interact with a family unit. Sharing decisions and 
attending to the child as a member of a family are the most effective 
and ethical ways of practising.
Ten days have passed and Malik is concerned about Mr Homa. He has sadly 
not responded to treatment. He deteriorates further, requiring high- flow oxygen 
and developing multiorgan failure. Mr Homa’s son tells Malik and the consultant 
on the ward round that he ‘hates to see his father suffering’ and asks, ‘What 
can	you	do	to	bring	Dad’s	distress	to	an	end?’	Malik’s	consultant	raises	Mr	
Homa’s care at the multidisciplinary team meeting. He explains that he is 
concerned that on- going treatment is no longer in Mr Homa’s best interests. 
The team agree that Mr Homa is increasingly unwell and note his son’s 
concern about his father. They agree that there should be an urgent discussion 
with	Mr	Homa’s	son	about	next	steps.	During	that	conversation,	Mr	Homa’s	son	
says	that	his	Dad	‘would	have	hated	to	be	in	this	state	and	always	said	“just	let	
me go with dignity when the time comes”. Can’t you give him an injection to 
help him on his way?’ The consultant explains that they cannot do anything to 
hasten Mr Homa’s death deliberately but they can withdraw active treatment, 
such as antibiotics and breathing assistance. They would also want to ensure 
that Mr Homa is comfortable by prescribing sedative drugs that might have 
an effect on his breathing but would help avoid him being distressed. His son 
agrees	that	this	is	the	best	course	of	action	and	asks	if	he	can	sit	with	his	Dad.	
The team agrees and arranges for Mr Homa to be transferred to a side- room 
on the ward, where Mr Homa’s son can stay with his father. They ask if there is 
anything else they can do to support either of them.
Commentary
The team is right to consider Mr Homa’s best interests together and to 
discuss the next steps with his son. Mr Homa’s son is able to give a clear 
sense of his father’s values and wishes. The consultant is clear that any 
action, such as an injection, to assist dying is unlawful, but explains that it 
is possible to withdraw active treatment that is no longer in Mr Homa’s best 
interests. He also explains that he may prescribe medication to alleviate 
suffering but with the potential to depress respiratory effort. The care 
provided is intended to allow a peaceful dying process that supports both 
the patient and his son, who wishes to stay until the end.
Box 5.7  Vignette 3
5
Ethics and the law 87
As children mature, whether a young person has capacity to 
make his or her own decisions is evaluated using principles derived 
from a case called Gillick v. West Norfolk and Wisbech Area 
Health Authority, which determined that a young person can make 
a choice about their own health where:
	 •		the	patient,	although	under	16,	can	understand	medical	informa-
tion sufficiently
	 •		the	doctor	cannot	persuade	the	patient	to	inform,	or	give	per-
mission for the doctor to inform, the parents
	 •		a	young	person	is	seeking	contraception	and	is	likely	to	have	
sexual intercourse with or without adequate contraception
	 •		the	patient’s	mental	or	physical	health	(or	both)	is	likely	to	suffer	
if treatment is not provided
	 •		it	is	in	the	patient’s	best	interests	for	the	doctor	to	treat	without	
parental consent.
The Gillick case recognized that young people differ in their abili-
ties to make decisions and established that function, not age, mat-
ters when considering whether a child can give consent. Situations 
should be approached on a case- by- case basis, taking into account 
the individual young person’s level of understanding of a particular 
treatment. It is possible (and perhaps likely) that someone may be 
considered to have capacity to consent to one treatment but not 
another. Even where a child does not have capacity to make their 
own decision, clinicians should respect the child’s dignity by dis -
cussing the proposed treatment with the child, even if the consent 
of the parents also has to be obtained.
In the UK, once a child reaches the age of 16, the Mental Capac-
ity Act 2005 states that they should be treated as an adult, except for 
the purposes of advance decision- making and appointing an LPA.
Further reading
General Medical Council. 0–18 Years: Guidance for All Doctors. London: GMC; 2018.
General Medical Council. Protecting Children and Young People: The 
Responsibilities of All Doctors. London: GMC; 2012, updated 2018. 
Confidentiality
Confidentiality is essential to therapeutic relationships. If clinicians 
violate the privacy of their patients, they risk harm, disrespect 
autonomy, undermine trust and call the medical profession into dis-
repute. The diminution of trust is significant ethically, with potentially 
serious consequences. Within the UK, confidentiality is protected 
by common and statutory law. Some jurisdictions make legal provi-
sion for privacy. Doctors who breach the confidentiality of patients 
may face professional and legal sanctions.
Respecting confidentiality in practice
Patients should understand that information about them will be 
shared with other professionals involved in their treatment. Usu -
ally, by giving consent for investigations or treatment, patients are 
deemed to give their implied consent for information to be shared 
within the clinical team. Rarely, patients might object to information 
being shared, even within a team. In such situations, the advice is 
that the patient’s wish should be respected, unless it compromises 
treatment. In almost all clinical circumstances, therefore, the con -
fidentiality of patients must be respected. Confidentiality can be 
breached inadvertently. For example, clinical conversations take 
place in lifts, corridors and cafés. Even on wards, confidentiality 
may be compromised by the proximity of beds and the visibility of 
whiteboards containing medical information. Everyone should be 
alert to incidental breaches of confidentiality and seek to minimize 
their role in unwittingly revealing sensitive information. 
When confidentiality must or may be breached
The duty of confidence is not absolute. Sometimes, the law requires 
that clinicians must reveal information about patients to others, even 
if they wish it were otherwise (Box 5.8). There are also circumstances 
in which a doctor has the discretion to share confidential information 
within defined terms. Such circumstances highlight the ethical ten -
sion between the rights of individuals and the public interest.
Aside from legal obligations, there are three situations in which 
information may be shared, namely:
	 •		The	patient	has	given	consent.
	 •		It	is	in	the	patient’s	best	interests	to	share	the	information,	but	it	
is impracticable or unreasonable to seek consent.
	 •		It	is	in	the	public	interest.
These three categories are a useful framework within which 
to think about the duty of confidentiality. They also require ethi -
cal judgement, particularly where sharing confidential information 
might be in the ‘public interest’ . In England and Wales, there is 
legal guidance on what constitutes sufficient ‘public interest’ to jus-
tify sharing confidential information, which is derived from the case 
of W v. Egdell. In that case, the Court of Appeal held that only the 
‘most compelling circumstances’ could justify a doctor acting con -
trary to the patient’s perceived interest in the absence of consent. 
The court stated that it would be in the public interest to share con-
fidential information where:
	 •		there	is	a	real	and	serious	risk	of	harm
	 •		the	risk	is	of	physical	harm
	 •		there	is	a	risk	to	an	identifiable	individual	or	individuals.
Consent should be sought wherever possible, and disclosure on 
the basis of the ‘public interest’ should be a last resort. Each case 
must be weighed on its own merits and a clinician who discloses 
confidential information on the grounds of ‘public interest’ must be 
prepared to justify the decision. Even where disclosure is justified, 
confidential information must be shared only with those who need 
to know.
If there is a perceived risk to the public interest, does a doctor 
have a duty to warn others of potential risk? In some jurisdictions 
there is a duty to warn, but in England and Wales there is no profes-
sional duty to do so. The judgement in W v. Egdell provides a justi-
fication for breaches of confidence in the public interest but it does 
not impose an obligation on clinicians to warn third parties about 
potential risks posed by their patients.
Further reading
British Medical Association. Confidentiality and Disclosure of Health Information: 
Toolkit. London: BMA; 2009.
General Medical Council. Confidentiality: Good Practice in Handling Patient 
Information. London: GMC; 2017. 
Resource allocation
Resources encompass all aspects of clinical care: that is, they 
include time, knowledge, skills and space, as well as treatment. In 
	 •		Notifiable	diseases,	which,	by	virtue	of	public	health	legislation,	must	be	
notified to the relevant consultant in communicable disease control
	 •		Court	orders
	 •		Road	traffic	accidents	that	lead	to	requests	from	the	police
	 •		Actual	or	suspected	terrorist	activity
Box 5.8  Examples of circumstances in which a doctor is 
required to share confidential information
5
 88 Ethical practice and clinical communication
circumstances of scarcity, waste and inefficiency of any resource 
are of ethical concern.
Access to healthcare is considered to be a fundamental right and 
has been captured in international law since it was included in the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights . However, the question 
of how to allocate limited resources is a perennial ethical question. 
Within the UK, the courts have made it clear that they will not force 
National Health Service (NHS) Trusts to provide treatments that are 
beyond their means. Nevertheless, the courts also demand that 
decisions about resources must be made on reasonable grounds.
Fairness
Both ethically and legally, prejudice or favouritism is unacceptable. 
Methods for allocating resources should be fair and just. In practice, 
this means that scarce resources should be allocated to patients on 
the basis of need and the time at which they sought treatment. It 
is respect on the part of clinicians for these principles of equality – 
equal need and equal chance – that fosters fairness and justice in the 
delivery of healthcare. For example, a well- run emergency depart-
ment will draw on the principles of equality of need and chance to:
	 •		decide	who	to	treat	first	and	how
	 •		offer	treatment	that	has	been	shown	to	deliver	optimal	results	for	
minimal expense
	 •		use	triage	to	determine	which	patients	are	most	in	need	and	
ensure that they are seen first, the queue (or waiting list) being 
based on need and time of presentation.
People should not be denied potentially beneficial treatments on 
the basis of their lifestyles. Such decisions are almost always preju-
dicial. For example, why single out smokers or the obese for blame, 
as opposed to those who engage in dangerous sports? Patients 
are not equal in their abilities to lead healthy lives and to make wise 
healthcare choices. Education, information, economic worth, confi-
dence and support are all variables that contribute to, and socially 
determine, health and wellbeing. As such, to regard all people as 
equal competitors and to reward those who, in many ways, are 
already better off is unjust and unfair. 
Global perspectives
Increasingly, resource allocation is being considered from an interna-
tional or global perspective. Beyond the boundaries of the NHS and the 
borders of the UK, moral questions about the availability of, and access 
to, effective healthcare are rightly attracting the attention of ethicists 
and clinicians. Anyone who is training for, or working in, medicine in 
the 21st century should consider fundamental moral questions about 
resource allocation, in particular those being raised by issues such as:
	 •		the	role	and	work	of	pharmaceutical	companies
	 •		the	mobility	of	trained	clinicians
	 •		the	preoccupation	of	funded	and	commercial	biomedical	re-
search with diseases that are prevalent in developed countries
	 •		notions	of	rights	to	health	and	life
	 •		the	status	of	those	seeking	asylum
	 •		persistent	inequalities	in	health. 
Professional competence and mistakes
Doctors must practise to an acceptable professional standard. 
There are essentially three sources that inform what it means to be 
a ‘competent’ doctor, namely:
	 •		the	law
	 •		professional	guidance	from	bodies	such	as	the	GMC
	 •		local	policy.
In practice, there is often overlap and interaction between the 
categories: for example, a doctor may be both a defendant in a 
negligence action and the subject of fitness to practise procedures. 
Professional bodies are established by, and work within, a legal 
framework and, in order to implement policy, legislation is required 
and interpretative case law will often follow.
Standards and the law
In most countries, the law provides the statutory framework within 
which the medical profession is regulated. For example, in the UK, it 
is the function of the GMC to maintain the register of medical practi-
tioners, provide ethical guidance, guide and quality- assure medical 
education and training, and conduct fitness- to- practise procedures. 
It is the GMC that defines standards of professional practice and 
has responsibility for investigation when a doctor’s standard of 
practice is questioned.
Clinicians have a responsibility not only to reflect on their own 
practice, but also to be aware of and, if necessary, respond to the 
practice of colleagues, even in the absence of formal ‘line manage-
ment’ responsibilities. 
Conscientious objection
Doctors are human beings who will have their own views about 
what is and is not acceptable ethically. Any student or doctor should 
feel able to express concerns, raise questions and challenge con -
structively. However, the GMC is clear that doctors must not allow 
their own beliefs or judgements to compromise clinical care or dis -
criminate against patients.
In the UK (apart from Northern Ireland), there is one situation 
in which the law provides for a right of conscientious objection: 
namely, in the provision of terminations of pregnancy and some 
reproductive medicine involving embryos. The right of conscien -
tious objection allows doctors to choose not to be involved in pro -
viding terminations, including making referrals to specialist services. 
However, doctors must not convey their beliefs in a judgemental 
way to a patient and should arrange for colleague to see the patient 
without delay. In an emergency, which is likely to be extremely rare 
in contemporary Western practice, a doctor would have to act if no 
one else was available.
The law is silent on whether the provision applies to medical 
students, although most medical schools will offer guidance and 
accommodate students who have a conscientious objection to 
terminations. 
Clinical negligence
Negligence is a civil claim where damage or loss has arisen as a 
result of an alleged breach of professional duty, such that the stan-
dard of care was not, on the balance of probabilities, that which 
could be reasonably expected.
Of the components of negligence, duty is the simplest: all doc -
tors have a duty of care to their patients. Whether a doctor has dis-
charged their professional duty adequately is determined by expert 
opinion on the standards that can reasonably be expected and an 
individual’s conduct in relation to those standards. If doctors have 
acted in a way that is consistent with a reasonable body of their 
peers and their actions or omissions withstand logical analysis, they 
are likely to meet the expected standards of care. Lack of experi -
ence is not taken into account in legal determinations of negligence.
The most common reason for a clinical negligence action to fail 
is causation. For example, the alleged harm may have occurred 
against the background of a complex medical condition or course of 
treatment, making it difficult to establish the actual cause.
5
Communication in medicine 89
Clinical negligence remains relatively rare and undue fear of liti -
gation can lead to defensive and poor practice. All doctors make 
mistakes and these do not necessarily constitute negligence or indi-
cate incompetence. Inherent in the definition of incompetence is 
time: that is, on- going review of a doctor’s practice to see whether 
there are patterns of error or repeated failure to learn from error. 
Regulatory bodies and medical defence organizations require doc -
tors to be honest about their mistakes and to apologize, remem -
bering that to do so is not necessarily an admission of negligence. 
Such honesty and humility, aside from its inherent moral value, have 
been shown to reduce the prospect of patient complaints or litiga -
tion. Being open is recognized as good practice internationally, and 
examples of an open approach in the USA, Australia and Singapore 
have actually reduced the costs of complaints. 
Professional bodies
Professional bodies have diverse but often overlapping roles in 
developing, defining and revising standards for doctors. The prin -
cipal publications in which the GMC sets out standards and obli -
gations relating to competence and performance are Duties of a 
Doctor and Good Medical Practice. 
Policy
There have been an exponential number of policy reforms that have 
shaped the ways in which the medical competence and account -
ability agendas have evolved. One of the most notable is the 
increase in the number of organizations concerned broadly with 
‘quality’ and performance. The increased scrutiny of doctors’ com-
petence has found further policy translation in the development of 
appraisal schemes and the revalidation process. There have been 
other policy initiatives that adopt the rhetoric of ‘quality’, such as 
increased use of clinical and administrative targets and the develop-
ment of specialist facilities.
Professional accountability is a hot topic. The law, professional 
guidance and policy documentation provide a starting point for 
 clinicians. Complaints and possible litigation are often brought by 
patients who feel aggrieved for reasons that may be unconnected 
with the clinical care that they have received. When patients are 
asked about their decisions to complain or to sue doctors, it is com-
mon for poor communication, insensitivity, administrative errors and 
lack of responsiveness to be cited as motivation. Doctors should 
offer an apology and explain fully and promptly what has happened, 
along with the likely short- term and long- term effects of any harm. 
Reluctance to say ‘sorry’ comes from a fear that it is an admis -
sion of fault, which later implies liability, but guidelines from medical 
defence organizations emphasize that this is not so. There is less to 
fear than doctors sometimes believe. The courts and professional 
bodies are concerned neither with best practice, nor with unfeasibly 
high standards of care. What is expected is that doctors behave in 
a way that accords with the practice of a reasonable doctor – and 
the reasonable doctor is not perfect. As long as clinicians adhere 
to some basic principles, it is possible to practise defensible rather 
than defensive medicine. Good habits begin in medical school. In 
particular, effective communication is a potent weapon in prevent -
ing complaints and, ultimately, encounters with the legal and regula-
tory systems. Having a clear framework helps resolve complaints, 
reduces clinicians’ stress and develops their professional reputation 
for handling difficult situations properly (Box 5.9).
Further reading
National Patient Safety Agency. Being Open: Communicating Patient Safety 
Incidents with Patients, Their Families and Carers; 2009. https://webarchive.natio
nalarchives.gov.uk.
Parliamentary and Health Service Ombudsman. Principles of Good Complaint 
Handling. London: HMSO; 2009.
World Health Organization. Patient Safety: Curriculum Guide for Medical 
Schools. Topic 8. Engaging with patients and carers. Geneva: WHO; 2009; pp. 
183–199.
https://www.gmc- uk.org/ethical- guidance/ethical- guidance- for- doctors/good- 
medical- practice/duties- of- a- doctor. Duties of a doctor. 
COMMUNICATION IN MEDICINE
Worldwide changes in society, together with evidence relating to 
improved health outcomes, are the forces driving expectations of 
patient partnership  in care. While ethics and law underpin the 
context of healthcare, it is through communication processes that 
evidence- based and patient- centred care is delivered. Doctors 
conduct around 200 000 consultations during their careers. Specific 
skills contribute to a consulting style that fosters trust and demon -
strates flexibility, openness, partnership, respect for autonomy and 
collaboration with the patient. Medical schools all over the world 
now include the learning skills of communication as a core part of 
the curriculum
What is patient- centred communication?
Patient- centred communication aims to reach a common under -
standing with the patient about the illness, its treatment, and the 
roles that the clinician and the patient will assume ( Fig. 5.1). Both 
the biomedical facts relating to the patient’s illness and the patient’s 
ideas, concerns, expectations and feelings are needed in order to 
diagnose what is the matter with the patient and to discover what 
matters to them (see Ch. 1).
This requires a good balance between:
	 •		clinicians	asking	all	the	questions	needed	to	include	or	exclude	
diagnoses
	 •		patients	being	asked	to	express	their	thoughts,	ideas,	concerns	
and expectations
	 •		clinicians	explaining	and	advising	in	ways	that	patients	can	un-
derstand so that they can be involved in decisions about their 
care.
This does not mean that clinicians totally abdicate power but 
rather that they share it. Patients want their doctors’ expert opinions 
and, in some cases, may still prefer to leave matters to the clinician.
Understanding patient concerns and expectations is always 
important because clinicians can offer practical help; even when 
they cannot, they can always listen supportively. Empathy has been 
described as ‘imagination for others’. It is different from sympathy 
	 •		Remember	that	the	complainant	is	still	a	patient,	to	whom	there	is	a	duty	
of care.
	 •		Do	not	delay.
	 •		Listen	and	express	regret	for	distress.
	 •		Acknowledge	when	things	have	gone	wrong	–	be	objective,	not	resentful	
or defensive.
	 •		Apologize	for	actual	or	perceived	shortcomings.
	 •		Provide	easily	understood	information	or	explanations.
	 •		Explain	what	has	happened	and	the	likely	short-	term	and	long-	term	
effects of any harm.
	 •		Offer	appropriate	redress.
	 •		Explain	how	things	will	improve.
	 •		Leave	medical	records	strictly	unaltered.
Box 5.9  Responding to complaints
5
 90 Ethical practice and clinical communication
(feeling the same as the patient), which rarely helps and can lead 
to clinician burnout. Empathy is a key skill in building the patient–
clinician relationship and is itself highly therapeutic. The essential 
starting point is attentive listening and observation of patients to try 
to understand their particular predicament and respond in a sup -
portive way. Empathy can be developed with practice, but it has to 
be genuine and cannot be counterfeited by a repertoire of routine 
mannerisms.
The majority of health problems in industrialized countries are 
long- term conditions that cannot be cured. In 2018 in the UK, 
people with long- term conditions accounted for about 50% of all 
GP appointments, 64% of all outpatient appointments and over 
70% of all inpatient bed days. To manage their conditions well on a 
daily basis, patients have to become experts in self- care and try to 
reduce their risks from lifestyle habits. All of these factors support 
the need for person- centred communication.
Patient- centredness has evolved in the West and English- 
speaking countries, and may not align well with societies where 
cultural norms prioritize collectivism over individualism. In the latter, 
people are seen as part of their wider social group (family- oriented), 
and harmony, obedience and respect for seniors are valued over 
open expression of difference in opinion and egalitarianism. In 
recent years, research on professional–patient communication in 
parts of East Asia and India has revealed complexity and variability 
of clinical encounters and patient preferences due to such cultur -
ally specific influences. Nevertheless, there are increasing signs that 
patient and professional preferences in these societies are moving 
towards active patient involvement in discussions about treatment. 
A more participatory style  of healthcare is likely to grow with 
worldwide access to the Web and societal expectations. 
What are the effects of communication?
Communication can have an effect on health outcomes  in a 
 variety of ways ( Fig. 5.2 ). Decades of research evidence show 
which aspects of communication improve diagnostic accuracy and 
efficiency, patients’ ability to follow treatment advice, patient and 
clinician satisfaction and, ultimately, health outcomes. Poor com -
munication results in missed problems and concerns, strained 
relationships, distress for patients, complaints and litigation. In the 
USA, surgeons exhibiting an authoritarian style and tone of com -
munication are more likely to be sued.
Some patients may not understand or remember what doctors 
said, while others actively decide not to follow advice and com -
monly do not tell their doctors, resulting in poor management. Skil-
ful communicators routinely check patients’ understanding as they 
explain and ask what patients think of the advice they are given 
(Box 5.10). Errors in use of medications are costly and risk patient 
safety.
Improved time management and costs
Integrating patient- centred communication into all interviews actu -
ally saves time in the long term and reduces non- essential inves-
tigations and referrals, which waste resources. Patients given the 
latest evidence of benefits and risks in treatment options com -
monly choose more conservative managements, without detriment 
to health. This has potential for considerable savings for health 
budgets. 
Barriers and difficulties in communication
Communication is not straightforward. Time constraints can pre -
vent both doctors and patients from feeling that they have each 
other’s attention and that they fully understand the problem from 
each other’s perspective. Under- estimation of the influence of psy-
chosocial issues on illness and their costs to healthcare means clini-
cians may resort to avoidance strategies, such as switching topic, 
premature reassurance or jollying patients along when they fear the 
discussion will unleash emotions that are too difficult to handle, 
upset the patient or take too much time. Patients, for their part, 
may not disclose concerns if they are anxious and embarrassed, 
or sense that the clinician is not interested or thinks that their com-
plaints are trivial.
Oral and written information is often so complex that it exceeds 
many people’s functional skills in language and numeracy. Health 
literacy is the ability to understand health information well enough 
to access and use information and services in order to make deci -
sions. Many patients have poor knowledge of how their body works 
and struggle to understand new information provided by doctors. 
Some concepts may be too unfamiliar to make sense of, even if 
3DWLHQWSUHVHQWVXQZHOO
&RQWHQWLOOQHVV
µSDWLHQWSHUVSHFWLYH¶
&RQWHQWGLVHDVH
µELRPHGLFDOSHUVSHFWLYH¶
'LVHDVHGLDJQRVLV
3DUDOOHOVHDUFKRIWZRFRQWHQWIUDPHZRUNV
6KDUHGGHFLVLRQRQPDQDJHPHQWSODQ
&20081,&$7,21
8QGHUVWDQGLQJWKHSDWLHQWFig. 5.1 The patient- centred clinical interview: content and skills. (Adapted from McWhinney IR, 
Levenstein JH. In: Stewart M, Roter D, eds. Communicating with Medical Patients. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage; 1989.)
5
Communication in medicine 91
described simply. For example, when fasting blood sugar levels are 
explained to newly diagnosed diabetics, many do not realize and 
are puzzled by the fact that there is sugar in their blood. Patients 
may be too embarrassed to say they do not understand. Cultural 
factors and language barriers also impede mutual understanding. 
The computer can act as a further barrier to communication with 
patients and guidelines exist for best practice in its use in consulta-
tions (Box 5.11).
Anxiety and emotions are major blocks to communication. 
Breaking bad news about a serious medical condition presents par-
ticular challenges (see p. 10 ). The way that news is broken has an 
immediate and long- term effect. When skilfully performed, it helps 
the patient and family to understand, cope and make the best of 
even very bad circumstances. These interviews are difficult because 
biomedical measures are sometimes of limited help, and patients 
are upset and can react unpredictably. The clinician may also feel 
upset – more so if there is an element of medical mishap. The two 
most difficult things that clinicians report are how to be honest with 
the patient while not destroying hope, and how to deal with the 
patient’s emotions. Guidelines on communicating bad news provide 
help to do these well.
Managing uncertainty is part of medical practice (see p. 11 ). 
Around 20% of GP consultations in the UK are for persistent bodily 
complaints where adequate examination does not reveal a structural 
or pathological explanation. In secondary care, 50% of outpatients 
fulfil criteria for such medically unexplained symptoms. Guidelines 
and training are available for doctors on how best to communicate 
and manage this difficult situation for patients in order to reduce 
futile and costly investigations or interventions and help patients 
cope with symptoms.
&RPPXQLFDWLRQIXQFWLRQV
,QIRUPDWLRQH[FKDQJH
5HVSRQGLQJWRHPRWLRQV
0DQDJLQJXQFHUWDLQW\
)RVWHULQJUHODWLRQVKLSV
0DNLQJGHFLVLRQV
(QDEOLQJVHOIPDQDJHPHQW
,QWHUPHGLDWHRXWFRPHV
$FFHVVWRFDUH
4XDOLW\PHGLFDOGHFLVLRQ
&RPPLWPHQWWRWUHDWPHQW
7UXVWLQV\VWHP
6RFLDOVXSSRUW
6HOIFDUHVNLOOV
(PRWLRQDOPDQDJHPHQW
+HDOWKRXWFRPHV
6XUYLYDOFXUHUHPLVVLRQ
/HVVVXIIHULQJ
(PRWLRQDOZHOOEHLQJ
3DLQFRQWURO
)XQFWLRQDODELOLW\
9LWDOLW\
3UR[LPDORXWFRPHV
8QGHUVWDQGLQJ
6DWLVIDFWLRQ
'RFWRU±SDWLHQW
DJUHHPHQW
7UXVW
)HHOLQJµNQRZQ¶
)HHOLQJLQYROYHG
5DSSRUW
0RWLYDWLRQ
Fig. 5.2 Pathways from communication to health. (From Street RL Jr, Makoul G, Arora NK et al. 
How does communication heal? Pathways linking clinician– patient communication to health outcomes. 
Patient Educ Couns 2009; 74:295–301 with permission.)
Explore
	• 		Ask. Establish what the patient 
already knows or thinks is 
wrong. This allows you to 
confirm, correct or add new 
information. 
Explain
	• 		Chunk and check. Give 
information in chunks that are 
easy to assimilate, one thing at 
a time. Check after each chunk 
that the patient understands.
	• 		Signpost. ‘I’ll explain first of all’; 
‘Can I move on now to explain 
treatment options …?’
	• 		Link. Explain the cause and 
effect of the condition in 
the context of the patient’s 
symptoms, e.g. ‘The reason you 
are experiencing … is  
because …’
	• 		Use plain language.	Use	clear,	
concise language; ‘translate’ 
any unavoidable medical terms 
and write them down.
	• 		Aid recall. Make use of 
simple diagrams and leaflets; 
recommend websites and 
support organizations. 
Explore
	• 		‘Teach back’.	Use	the	
universal precaution of always 
asking patients to recap to you 
so you check you have explained 
it clearly enough.
	• 		Acknowledge feelings. Check 
what patient feels about the 
information.
Box 5.10  Giving information and ‘teach back’
Acquaint yourself with the medical record
	 •		Look	at	the	patient’s	record	beforehand,	allowing	for	less	review	‘screen	
time’ while in the patient’s presence 
Take a minute
	 •		Start	the	visit	technology-	free,	giving	the	patient	and	their	concerns	your	
full attention 
Triangulate placement of computer, patient, clinician
	 •		Arrange	the	room	so	that	it	allows	you	to	look	at	both	the	screen	and	the	
patient, and the patient to look at you and the screen 
Engage, explain, educate
	 •		Engage	the	patient	in	your	use	of	the	computer	as	a	tool	during	the	visit
	 •		Explain	what	you	are	doing	when	you	are	both	entering	data	and	looking	
for	information	on	the	computer	(signposting)
	 •		Educate	the	patient	by	letting	them	see	what	you	are	seeing	on	the	
screen, especially graphs and images 
No more screen
	 •		When	discussing	sensitive	issues,	completely	disengage	from	the	screen	
(look	at	the	patient,	turn	away	from	the	screen,	take	your	hands	off	the	keys) 
Describe the discharge/Don’t forget to log out
	 •		Be	explicit	about	what	orders	you	are	entering	in	the	computer	at	the	end	
of	the	visit	and	what	the	patient	should	expect	(e.g.	scheduling,	tests)
  
Rosenbaum	M,	Jansen	KL,	Shen	W	et al.	University	of	Iowa	Carver	College	of	Medicine,	
2014. Personal communication.
Box 5.11  ‘ATTEND’: a mnemonic for patient–physician 
communication using the electronic medical 
record
5
 92 Ethical practice and clinical communication
Clinicians are human and are often rushed and stressed. They 
work against the clock and infallible systems. However, as profes -
sionals, they, together with healthcare managers, bear the responsi-
bility for addressing communication difficulties.
Further reading
Baile WF, Lenzi R, Kudelka AP et al. SPIKES – a six- step protocol for delivering 
bad news: application to the patient with cancer. Oncologist 2000; 5:302–311.
Coulter A, Collins A. Making Shared Decision- making a Reality. No Decision 
About Me Without Me. London: King’s Fund; 2011.
Pun JKH, Chan EA, Wang S et al . Health professional– patient communication 
practices in East Asia: an integrative review of an emerging field of research and 
practice in Hong Kong, South Korea, Japan, Taiwan and Mainland China. Pat 
Educ Couns 2018; 101:1193–1206.
Roter DL, Frankel RM, Hall JA et al . The expression of emotion through 
nonverbal behaviour in medical visits. J Gen Intern Med 2006; 21:S28–S34.
Royal College of Psychiatrists. Guidance for Health Professionals on Medically 
Unexplained Symptoms (MUS); 2011. https://www.rcpsych.ac.uk/mental- 
health/problems- disorders/medically- unexplained- symptoms.
Stewart M, Brown JB, Boon H et al . Evidence on patient communication. Cancer 
Prev Control 1999; 3:25–30.
World Health Organization. Health Literacy – Stepping up Impact; 2017. https://www. 
who.int/global- coordination- mechanism/working- groups/hl_kickbusch.pdf. 
Teamwork
Modern healthcare is complex, with patients being looked after 
by multiple healthcare professionals working in shifts. Problems 
arise when information is not transmitted, is misunderstood or is 
not recorded. A shared sense of ethical endeavour and effective 
communication are essential, especially when people are busy or a 
patient is critically ill.
Most complaints in teams relate to communication. Communica-
tion styles vary. Some people are indirect and more elaborate in their 
speech, while others come straight to the point, leaving out detail and 
their own rationale. Each type can feel irritated, offended or puzzled 
by the other. Hierarchies make it harder for people to speak up. The 
multidisciplinary team meeting is a space to establish norms, model 
inclusivity and enact ethical practice by listening, valuing and involv-
ing all members of the team. A functional team is an ethical team 
that recognizes that good care begins with the way colleagues treat 
each other. Poor communication and inattention to ethical norms 
can be dangerous if, for example, someone feels unable to point out 
an error, offer information or ask a question. Hinting and hoping is 
not good communication. Team leaders who ‘flatten’ the hierarchy 
by knowing and using people’s names, routinely having briefings and 
debriefings, do not let their own self- image override doing the right 
thing, and positively encourage colleagues to speak up reduce the 
number of adverse events. Teamwork requires collaboration, open 
sharing of ideas and a readiness to discuss weaknesses and errors. 
Lessons from industries such as aviation have been used to show 
how to reduce errors caused by poor communication.
Contexts for team communication include ward handovers, 
requests for help, acceptance of referrals and communication in the 
operating theatre.
Handover between teams is helped when everyone adopts a 
clear system. Frameworks such as SBAR (situation – background 
– assessment – recommendation) use standardized prompt ques -
tions in four sections to ensure team members share concise and 
focused information at the correct level of detail (see p. 11 ). This 
increases patient safety.
Communication on discharge is just as essential, and primary 
care physicians need sufficient information, including details of 
medication, to continue care safely. Patients in some countries 
now receive copies of letters sent to their doctors to ensure that 
information is shared. This requires some skill to enable meaning to 
be clear to all parties. 
Clinical records
All medical interviews should be well documented. Good records 
are vital in providing best care, reducing error and ensuring patient 
safety. They are the responsibility of everyone in the healthcare 
team (Box 5.12).
In many countries, patients have the right to see their records, 
which provide essential information when a complaint or claim 
for negligence is made. They are also valuable as part of audit to 
improve standards of healthcare.
Electronic patient records are increasingly replacing written 
ones. They include more information, overcome problems of leg -
ibility, and reduce prescription error by 66% compared to hand -
written ones. With adequate data protection, they offer immense 
potential for unifying record systems and allowing access across 
the healthcare team in primary, secondary and tertiary care sec -
tors. Increasingly, patients will have access and even contribute 
to their records.
Further reading
British Medical Association. Safe Handover: Safe Patients. Guidance on Clinical 
Handover for Clinicians and Managers. London: BMA; 2009; http://www.bma.org.
uk.
Royal College of Physicians. A Clinician’s Guide to Record Standards. 2009; 
http://www.rcplondon.ac.uk.
Royal College of Physicians. Ward Rounds in Medicine. London: RCP; 2012; 
https://www.rcplondon.ac.uk.
World Health Organization. The WHO Surgical Safety Checklist. 2009;  
http://www.who.int. 
Culture, diversity and communication
Culture is a broad term that extends beyond language and includes 
values, beliefs, behaviours, practices, institutions and the way 
people communicate. Clinicians commonly express anxiety and 
uncertainty about how to respond to cultural diversity, how to work 
with interpreters and how to avoid causing offence. Doctors strive 
to treat all patients equally; however, research reveals that those 
What records should include
	 •		Relevant	clinical	and	
psychosocial information – 
history and examination
	 •		Relevant	findings,	both	positive	
and negative
	 •		Diagnosis,	including	
uncertainties
	 •		Test	results
	 •		Correspondence,	including	
e- mails and text messages
	 •		Decisions	made,	actions	agreed	
and identification of who is 
making and agreeing decisions
	 •		Information	given	to	patients
	 •		Consent	–	details	of	patient’s	
capacity	(or	lack	of	capacity)	to	
consent
	 •		Drugs	prescribed	or	other	
investigations or treatments
	 •		Follow-	up	and	referrals 
Criteria for good recordsa,b
	 •		Clear,	accurate,	legible	and	
contemporaneous
	 •		Dated	and	signed	with	printed	
name
	 •		Original	–	never	altered	(using	
a signed, dated additional note 
alongside	any	mistake)
	 •		Kept	secure
  
Box 5.12  Essentials of record- keeping
a General Medical Council. Good Medical Practice.	London:	GMC;	2012.
b Medical Protection Society. An Essential Guide to Medical Records; 2018. https://www. 
medicalprotection.org/uk/articles/an- mps- essential- guide- to- medical- records.
5
Communication in medicine 93
from minority cultures receive poorer healthcare, even when they 
speak the same language as the clinician. They experience fewer 
expressions of empathy, shorter consultations and less inclusion in 
shared decision- making. They also tend to say less in consultations.
Beliefs
We all take our culture for granted but it can profoundly affect ideas 
about symptoms, causes of illness, and appropriate behaviour and 
treatment. Beliefs influence when a patient seeks medical assis -
tance, what patients and doctors expect of the consultation, and 
how they communicate. In some cultures, for example, it is very dif-
ficult for a woman to be seen by a male doctor. Talking about death 
is strongly taboo in others, thus inhibiting discussions about end- 
of- life care. Some cultures regard it as the family members’ duty to 
speak for the patient, while the doctor, respecting patient autonomy, 
will expect to talk directly with the patient. Sensitive topics may be 
more difficult but avoidance could jeopardize care. It helps to apolo-
gize if inadvertent offence occurs and explain why such questions 
are required. Clinicians vary too. Those from traditional cultures may 
have a more paternalistic style than some patients want. 
Language
Patients sometimes bring a family member or friend to interpret. The 
latter may not understand medical questions and may be censoring 
sensitive matters or expressing their own views rather than those of 
the patient. Confidentiality cannot be guaranteed and patients may 
feel restricted in what they can say. On the other hand, patients may 
want a trusted family member to translate. Children should not be 
used to interpret.
For these reasons a trained interpreter who follows best practice 
guidelines should be used. Ask for the correct pronunciation of a 
patient’s name and about any beliefs and concerns that are relevant 
in the patient’s culture, as well as cultural differences in body lan -
guage. Patients may be more or less culturally traditional, so check 
out assumptions.
Arrange seating to see both the patient and the interpreter 
but always look and speak directly to the patient. Speak in short 
phrases, avoid jargon and find out the patient’s ideas, concerns and 
expectations. Watch for non- verbal communication and check that 
the patient understands.
Clinicians sometimes worry that interpreters are editing when 
long exchanges are followed by only a short summary back to 
them. It helps to ask interpreters to translate exactly what has 
been said. The interpreter can stand outside the curtain during 
examination. If professional interpreters are not available, tele -
phone language lines can be used. Advocates are more than just 
language interpreters in that they understand cultural beliefs and 
practices. They also help patients to understand the workings of 
the healthcare system.  
Non- verbal communication
Awareness of cultural taboos is helpful in maintaining dignity and 
respect. For example, hand- shaking, eye contact, personal space 
and sensitive subjects vary across cultures.
Paraverbal communication – the way things are said rather than 
what is said – also differs and influences rapport and relationships. 
We infer things from tone of voice, stress on words and phrases, 
silence, pace and the politeness conventions that are used. Some 
cultures are more open, direct and assertive than others. Some lan-
guages do not differentiate gender in common nouns and pronouns, 
so ‘he’ and ‘she’ may be used interchangeably. It is hardly surprising 
that misunderstandings occur and it can be much harder to create 
a rapport. It is worth remembering that smiling is a universal expres-
sion of kindness and warmth.
Further reading
Cooper LA, Roter DL, Carson KA et al . The associations of clinicians’ implicit 
attitudes about race with medical visit communication and patient ratings of 
interpersonal care. Am J Public Health 2012; 102:979–987.
Kai J. Enhancing consultations with interpreters: learning more about how. Br J 
Gen Pract 2013; 63:66–67. 
Patients with impaired communication 
faculties
All healthcare professionals need patience, ingenuity and willing -
ness to learn to be able to communicate effectively with patients 
who have impaired communication faculties.
Impaired hearing
Some 55% of people over 60 are deaf or hard of hearing. Patients may 
be accompanied by a signer but fewer than 1% of hearing- impaired 
people sign. Many hard- of- hearing people lip- read and some common- 
sense tips are listed in Box 5.13. Clinicians who mumble, speak fast or 
have strong accents have a responsibility to make particular efforts to 
be understood. Conversation aids may be available or patients can be 
asked how best to communicate with them. 
Impaired vision
Patients who have visual impairment can miss non- verbal cues in 
communication. It may sound obvious but it helps to make more 
conscious efforts to use patients’ names so they know they are 
being spoken to. Clinicians should avoid sudden touch, explain 
what they are about to do, and say what they are doing as they 
go along. Large- print information sheets should be available. 
Email and SMS text communication is increasingly used by blind 
and partially sighted people who have a smartphone, tablet or 
computer equipped with assistive technology.  
Patients with limited understanding or speech
Aphasia is a communication disorder following strokes. Even 
though hearing and thought processes are unaffected, patients find 
it hard to understand, or they know what they want to say but can -
not find the words; they are literally ‘lost for words’. This also affects 
their ability to write, gesture, draw or mime their thoughts.
Patients may have a strength in one area – for example, ability to 
understand – with a weakness in another other area – for example, 
expression – or vice versa. It helps to find a quiet place without 
distractions, to make eye contact and attract the person’s attention. 
Speak slowly and clearly, use simple phrases, try different words, 
and leave plenty of time between sentences to allow for extra pro -
cessing time. Make it obvious when changing the subject.
	 •		Ask	if	they	need	to	lip-	read	
when you are speaking
	 •		Position	yourself	on	the	better-	
hearing side
	 •		Smile	and	use	eye	contact
	 •		Face	the	light
	 •		Do	not	cover	your	face	or	mouth
	 •		Use	plain	language
	 •		Speak	clearly	but	not	too	slowly
	 •		Do	not	shout
	 •		If	stuck,	write	it	down
	 •		Check	for	understanding
	 •		Never	say	‘Forget	it’!
Box 5.13  Communicating with people who are deaf or  
hard of hearing
  
https://www.actiononhearingloss.org.uk/ Action on Hearing Loss.
5
 94 Ethical practice and clinical communication
Closed questions requiring ‘yes’ or ‘no’ answers are easier. Write 
down key words or headings, to which both the patient and the cli-
nician can refer. This helps because the auditory memory needed to 
‘hold on to’ the spoken word taxes the patient’s language system. 
Use pictures and have pen and paper to hand if the patient can use 
them. Gestures, pointing and more facial expression can help. Do 
not interrupt or pretend to understand. Seek advice from carers and 
speech and language therapists. 
Technology
The Internet
The Internet has revolutionized ready access to information. 
Research reveals that people feel more able to ask informed ques -
tions and have less fear of the unknown. Most doctors support 
Internet use in enhancing consultations, especially post diagnosis, 
when it helps patients understand and manage their illness. They 
also worry that patients access poor- quality information. Directing 
patients to trustworthy, reputable Internet sites is recommended. 
Telemedicine and artificial intelligence are growing areas within 
healthcare. They call for adaptation of communication and the need 
for research on its impact on health outcomes. 
Decision aids
Weighing up treatment benefits and risks where both may be substan-
tial but not guaranteed is very hard for patients. Decision aids that are 
evidence- based, are written in non- technical language and include 
visual representations help people digest complex statistical informa-
tion. They are available in a variety of media (online, print, video). Deci-
sion aids from reliable and independent sources help people think 
through what is important to them, so that they can make choices 
from the evidence that reflect their own values and preferences.
These aids can improve communication between doctors and 
patients, and support patient autonomy in decisions over manage -
ment. If they are to become part of routine clinical practice, they 
need to be embraced by the clinical community, established as 
part of the clinical workflow, and included in education, training and 
development programmes for healthcare professionals. 
Training in communication skills
This chapter has covered principles and some practical advice on 
communication in healthcare. There is clear evidence that commu -
nication ability is not just innate. It is a professional skill and respon-
sibility that can be learned. Skills cannot be learned from books, 
and the opportunity to practise and receive constructive feedback 
on performance is essential.
Further reading
Drug and Therapeutics Bulletin. An introduction to patient decision aids. BMJ 
2013; 346:f4147.
Pletneva N, Cruchet S, Simonet MA et al . Results of the 10th HON Survey on 
Health and Medical Internet Use. Stud Health Technol Inform 2011; 169:73–77.
Robertson K, updated by Cushing A. Communication Skills. BMJ Learning 
Online; 2016. https://learning.bmj.com/learning/module- intro/communication- 
skills- guide.
Silverman J, Kurtz Z, Draper J. The Calgary–Cambridge guide: a guide to the 
medical interview. In: Skills for Communicating with Patients, 3rd edn. Abingdon: 
Radcliffe Medical Press; 2013. http://www.skillscascade.com.
Significant websites
https://decisionaid.ohri.ca/ Patient decision aids.
https://www.actiononhearingloss.org.uk/ Action on Hearing Loss.
http://www.bma.org.uk/ethics British Medical Association ethics.
http://www.each.eu/ International Association for Communication in Healthcare .
https://www.england.nhs.uk/rightcare/useful- links/shared- decision- making/ NHS 
Shared Decision Making programme.
http://www.gmc- uk.org/ General Medical Council.
http://www.rnib.org.uk Royal National Institute of Blind People.
http://www.stroke.org.uk Stroke Association.
Reliable Internet information for patients/patient 
experiences
http://www.healthtalk.org Provides advice and information by sharing people’s 
experiences.
http://www.HON.ch Health On the Net.
http://www.nhs.uk UK National Health Service.
